<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>An Arab Pilgrimage</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="an-arab-pilgrimage" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Arab Pilgrimage</h2>
			<p>All day long in the blazing heat the camels have come shuffling and slouching through the sand past Helouan for the March full moon is here and five thousand Bedouins are making their annual pilgrimage to the Tomb in the Desert, where the Sheikh Abou Seria (“Father of Speed”) fulfil the function of an Ar Lourdes From far and near with their families their wives and children, then tents and goats, then plain- tive piping reeds and then incessant tapping of drums the procession has been struggling In since sunrise. Hundreds of donkeys trip le the stately camels, and the separate lines of dust radiate like the spokes of in invisible wheel towards the great encampment just below Helouan, to merge later in the single stream that journeys forty miles south-east to the Tomb itself. To the music of this soft, gay piping the camels come swaying§ in beneath the enormous loads. Tents spring up over acres of yellow sand; camps are pitched, al! separate yet all touching; the donkeys roll in the hot soil; the children laugh and play; the men, grave as the camels, sit round against the walls of bersim and water-jars and baggage that lie in heaps; and the women whisper to one another behind their veils how then little ones shall all be healed presently, and more⁠—that the childless wives among them shall at last become mothers. At the Tomb of Abou Seria these things come to pass at the March full moon. It is a time of great rejoicing.</p>
			<p>Shortly after dawn the first stragglers came in⁠—fellaheen on tired donkeys many, too, on foot. They came from villages on the other side of Cairo. For the poor travel slowly, and start first Che wealthy Bedouin sheikhs, swathed in white, with circlets of gold about their turbaned heads, come lat: on their grand white camels, wives and retainers close behin them. And from dawn, all through the burning heat of noo day and afternoon, the horde of fellaheen troop straggling in till the crimson sunset, dying behind the Lybian Desert, fal on an encampment grown wide and deep. The palm grove along the Delta cast long shadows. The lizards sing among the dunes. The women start their wild and curious ululating shrill as an animal cry and hardly human. And suddenly the moon shows her huge yellow disc above the Mokattam Hill and draws a marvellous sweetness out of the Desert, sheeting the spread encampment with a silvery veil.</p>
			<p>It is a wonderful sight. The camels seem twice their natural size among the piled-up fodder. Little fires spring uy built over stones. Voices are low; noises die down one by one braving of donkeys, gurgling grunts of camels, bleating of goat and kids soon to be sacrificed. Groups gather closely round he fires, for the night air nips. Coffee is made in tiny chin cups, and the gaunt heads of the camels thrust forward ov: the very shoulders of their owners They chew and chew and chew Those dark bundles in the sand lying apart by themselves, are men already asleep, wrapped from head to feet in sheets of black and blue and white and yellow. No on treads on them. The bare feet silently to and fro, picking thei way so carefully. And everywhere dark faces gleam in the moonlight, eves flash like stars and white teeth shine.</p>
			<p>Little visits are paid from group to group. A bearded fellow with face of night enters a circle where all are seated round the fire and coffee-pot. “Are you happy? ” | am happy because of your exist- ence.” “Coffee?” ’ handing him cup. ~ Coffee for ever,” as he sip it slowly. We outsiders watch an stare and question, yet get no near to them. Centuries lie between. The courtesy is perfect. They accept cigarette, lighting it with flint and steel, offering the latter as a present that may not be refused. The young man, playing his reeds so softly to a group of listeners, hands them over to an admirer who has praised them, with “Please accept them from me.” ’ Behind, in the sand, men are praying on their knees toward Mecca. “Sing to us, kindly,” asks an Englishman, who knows Arabic, of another man. The singer is shy, but oniy requires coaxing, and when the Englishman suggests a certain song the other hesitates. “It is not pleasing that I should sing such <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. song before gentlemen and ladies.” ‘ They don’t understand . word.” “But I cannot do it. Whether they understand or no, I find it not pleasing.” And, after this lesson in sweet delicacy, between the verses of a song he finally chants, always this question: ‘‘ Does my voice please you, O gentleman? ” Yet these are merely fellaheen, the peasant toilers of the Deita, who accompany the great Bedouin Pilgrimage to the Desert Tomb of Abou Seria, Father of Speed, one of Mahomet’s generals⁠ ⁠… And after midnight one or two of them rise quietly und resume their journey. “ ‘ Our camels travel better in the night-time.’ Off they go, with their donkeys, goats and children, carrying all they possess in this world with them. The un measured desert swallows them. No sound comes back. ihe vanish in the moonlight as softly as they came. One thinks of that Bedouin who loved an Englishman, and paid him the great honour of taking him home. “I will show you my home,” he said, and they travelled three days and nights across the desert. Beneath a limestone boulder he ponte d to the ground. “Now you are in my home,” he said, proudly, and with the stately dignity of a great Prince of the Desert. And the English man saw a little pile of ashes at his feet. It was summer, tent unnecessary; the wife and flocks were away. This square foot of sand in the enormous wilderness was Home.</p>
			<p>In the morning, with the rising sun, the Bedouin arrive. Before Helouan is awake their white head-dress was visible far down the sandy waste that meets the fringe of Delta towards Cairo. But Helouan soon comes down to see. Few of them tarry here; they go straight through; the Bedouin do not like the people, houses, tourists. They resent the cameras. flourish their whips of buffalo-hide and trot past almost fiercely. There is scorn in their eves, as they circle about their wives. High on their splendid camels, they have a regal air, making the great brutes turn and double as easily as horses, and shouting angrily if anyone goes near the water-sellers. This is their last watering- place before the Tomb is reached, and to trifle with a Bedouin’s water is like trifling with his wives. And no wonder they wear this princely mien, for the whole Imperial Desert is their home. Upon the slower camels in their lordly train, sometimes fou abreast, their women, all carefully veiled, sit with the little children. Some are hidden from sight in tent-like canvas gorgeously striped and coloured. It sways to and fro with the enormous knee-stroke of the camels like a boat at sea. Solemnly the Moslem world files past across the sands. And we out- siders get no nearer, ask, stare, and follow as we may. The gulf is not bridged that lies between our minds and theirs. In vain we try. wondering what thev think and feel, and what emotions hide behind those fine bronze faces. Their politeness veils it all, their own deep world; their courtesy screens revela- tion. They move, like the camels, at the pace of a thousand years, unchanging. We watch them across barriers, that is all. Note that oid man praying alone there, behind the munching camel. He has washed his hands and feet : his carpet is spread on the sand, and his shoes are oif. Mind. heart and soul are concentrated. He is oblivious to the worid about him as he bows towards the East and his forehead taps the ground.</p>
			<p>As the moon rises higher and night becomes all white the fun begins in earnest⁠—Fantasia, as they call it, borrowing foreign word. A couple Of mounted police from Helouan come down to keep order anc sec that the few Inquisitive tourists from the hotels are not molested. But their services are m once required. Only the little children trot round with their incessant demand for baksheesh Vhe Arabs take no notice of us outsiders, beyond making wav when we approach, offering here and there a word of explanation or inviting us to drink coffee with them when we draw near to their fire-circles. The Fantasia vrows fast and furious, while the crouching camels munch and the cries of goats and donkeys mingle with the women’s weird ululating In one corner a ring is formed and the band begins to play⁠—two pipes and a tomtom. To the endless repetition of a single phrase half melody, half chant enters a Sheikh upon his Arab horse Phe gold and silver tray pings gleam in the moonlight His head-dress shines the horse’s metal necklace chinks and rattles Holding the reins in one hand, the other grips a stall with its point in the sand round this he circles in and out, making a figure of eight, the animal taking its small steps proudly, neck arched, tail flying head held gracefully erect. Suddenly the rider swings a gun round from his back, and fires it olf into the sand with one hand the people watch in silence; the horse prances out; another sheikh enters the ring and goes through a similar performances</p>
			<p>In another direction a circle several hundred strong, packed close as herrings, sit round upon the sand, and a story-teller stands in the centre, reciting wonderful adventures with many wild gesticulations. He carries a waving stick, and his falls and rises with a wailing note. All those faces in the moon hight watch and listen with rapt attention. A burst of laughter comes, then exclamations of delight, then long-drawn “ohs!” ’ Tales of Arabian Nights go floating across the desert ait towards another group, where the dancing-girls, who accompany the Pilgrimage from Cairo, are performing to vet another circle of onlookers.</p>
			<p>Further off, upon the outskirts of the camp, rows of tall shapely men stand waving their arms, swaying to and tro bending their thin and graceful necks as they recite their songs of a semi-religious, semi-erotic character, towards the East They suddenly kneel and bow, then rise again: the singing voes on and on for hours, and from the distance the chanting of other groups comes in upon the breeze. It is a mournful sound. A few hundred yards outside the encampment these various chanting groups combine in a single tone that holds the monotony of wind blowing among the boulders of the desert.</p>
			<p>And the Fantasia continues tar into the night, while the moon climbs higher, the old Nile flows slowly by and the desert listens solemnly all round. Numbers sleep through it; here and there some rise up and disappear across the sand; every where are the outlines of the humped and pointed little tents, the grotesque heads and necks of camels and sheeted human figures passing softly to and fio through the moonlight Al] know that strangers stand and watch them, but, while aware of it, they are utterly indifferent. The rejoicing is amon themselves, no question of display or showing off for others. They simply do what they have done for centuries, and will do for centuries to come A sense of something eternal, ond infinite as the desert itself, rises from the camp. It stirs thi blood. Somewhere in it there is a touch of awe</p>
			<p>At sunrise the tents are struck, and the entire mass moves on across the sand in single file, a procession stretching fot miles. At the Tomb itself, two days later, to the light of a thousand camp fires, the Fantasia is renewed in full earnest The animals are sacrificed. There is endless praying, dancing, singing, acting and the rest. Then all return the wav they went. The Bedouin scatter again to their various resting- places in the desert-home. Phe camels come slouching and shuffling through the sands past Helouan.</p>
			<p>What remains with me, however, 1s not so much the memory of their Fantasia and wild rejoicing, as the moonlit: picture oi the little families who left the camp to continue their journey beneath the stars. For the sight stirred old deep yearnings that every Nature-lover knows too well. So quietly they stole away into the immeasurable desert! All their possessions in this world they carried easily with them, and in their hearts this ancient Faith the ages cannot change. The camels padded off, veiled women in the swaying tents upon their backs. The silhouettes were strange and mysterious against the brilliant stars Like dreams ol a forgotten world they melted into the distance swift!y. Moonlight, sand and desert took them home.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
