<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2>AN EGYPTIAN HORNET</h2>


<p class="noi">The word has an angry, malignant sound that brings the idea of
attack vividly into the mind. There is a vicious sting about it
somewhere&mdash;even a foreigner, ignorant of the meaning, must feel it.
A hornet is wicked; it darts and stabs; it pierces, aiming without
provocation for the face and eyes. The name suggests a metallic droning
of evil wings, fierce flight, and poisonous assault. Though black and
yellow, it sounds scarlet. There is blood in it. A striped tiger of the
air in concentrated form! There is no escape&mdash;if it attacks.</p>

<p>In Egypt an ordinary bee is the size of an English hornet, but the
Egyptian hornet is enormous. It is truly monstrous&mdash;an ominous, dying
terror. It shares that universal quality of the land of the Sphinx and
Pyramids&mdash;great size. It is a formidable insect, worse than scorpion
or tarantula. The Rev. James Milligan, meeting one for the first
time, realised the meaning of another word as well, a word he used
prolifically in his eloquent sermons&mdash;devil.</p>

<p>One morning in April, when the heat began to bring the insects out, he
rose as usual betimes and went across the wide stone corridor to his
bath. The desert already glared in through the open windows. The heat
would be afflicting later in the day, but at this early hour the cool
north wind blew pleasantly down the hotel passages. It was Sunday,
and at half-past eight o&rsquo;clock he would appear to conduct the morning
service for the English visitors. The floor of the passage-way was
cold beneath his feet in their thin native slippers of bright yellow.
He was neither young nor old; his salary was comfortable; he had a
competency of his own, without wife or children to absorb it; the dry
climate had been recommended to him; and&mdash;the big hotel took him in for
next to nothing. And he was thoroughly pleased with himself, for he was
a sleek, vain, pompous, well-advertised personality, but mean as a rat.
No worries of any kind were on his mind as, carrying sponge and towel,
scented soap and a bottle of Scrubb&rsquo;s ammonia, he travelled amiably
across the deserted, shining corridor to the bathroom. And nothing
went wrong with the Rev. James Milligan until he opened the door, and
his eye fell upon a dark, suspicious-looking object clinging to the
window-pane in front of him.</p>

<p>And even then, at first, he felt no anxiety or alarm, but merely a
natural curiosity to know exactly what it was&mdash;this little clot of an
odd-shaped, elongated thing that stuck there on the wooden framework
six feet before his aquiline nose. He went straight up to it to
see&mdash;then stopped dead. His heart gave a distinct, unclerical leap. His
lips formed themselves into unregenerate shape. He gasped: &ldquo;Good God!
What is it?&rdquo; For something unholy, something wicked as a secret sin,
stuck there before his eyes in the patch of blazing sunshine. He caught
his breath.</p>

<p>For a moment he was unable to move, as though the sight half fascinated
him. Then, cautiously and very slowly&mdash;stealthily, in fact&mdash;he withdrew
towards the door he had just entered. Fearful of making the smallest
sound, he retraced his steps on tiptoe. His yellow slippers shuffled.
His dry sponge fell, and bounded till it settled, rolling close beneath
the horribly attractive object facing him. From the safety of the
open door, with ample space for retreat behind him, he paused and
stared. His entire being focused itself in his eyes. It was a hornet
that he saw. It hung there, motionless and threatening, between him
and the bathroom door. And at first he merely exclaimed&mdash;below his
breath&mdash;&ldquo;Good God! It&rsquo;s an Egyptian hornet!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Being a man with a reputation for decided action, however, he soon
recovered himself. He was well schooled in self-control. When people
left his church at the beginning of the sermon, no muscle of his face
betrayed the wounded vanity and annoyance that burned deep in his
heart. But a hornet sitting directly in his path was a very different
matter. He realised in a flash that he was poorly clothed&mdash;in a word,
that he was practically half naked.</p>

<p>From a distance he examined this intrusion of the devil. It was calm
and very still. It was wonderfully made, both before and behind. Its
wings were folded upon its terrible body. Long, sinuous things, pointed
like temptation, barbed as well, stuck out of it. There was poison, and
yet grace, in its exquisite presentment. Its shiny black was beautiful,
and the yellow stripes upon its sleek, curved abdomen were like the
gleaming ornaments upon some feminine body of the seductive world he
preached against. Almost, he saw an abandoned dancer on the stage.
And then, swiftly in his impressionable soul, the simile changed,
and he saw instead more blunt and aggressive forms of destruction.
The well-filled body, tapering to a horrid point, reminded him of
those perfect engines of death that reduce hundreds to annihilation
unawares&mdash;torpedoes, shells, projectiles, crammed with secret,
desolating powers. Its wings, its awful, quiet head, its delicate,
slim waist, its stripes of brilliant saffron&mdash;all these seemed the
concentrated prototype of abominations made cleverly by the brain of
man, and beautifully painted to disguise their invisible freight of
cruel death.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Bah!&rdquo; he exclaimed, ashamed of his prolific imagination. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only
a hornet after all&mdash;an insect!&rdquo; And he contrived a hurried, careful
plan. He aimed a towel at it, rolled up into a ball&mdash;but did not throw
it. He might miss. He remembered that his ankles were unprotected.
Instead, he paused again, examining the black and yellow object in
safe retirement near the door, as one day he hoped to watch the world
in leisurely retirement in the country. It did not move. It was fixed
and terrible. It made no sound. Its wings were folded. Not even the
black antennae, blunt at the tips like clubs, showed the least stir or
tremble. It breathed, however. He watched the rise and fall of the evil
body; it breathed air in and out as he himself did. The creature, he
realised, had lungs and heart and organs. It had a brain! Its mind was
active all this time. It knew it was being watched. It merely waited.
Any second, with a whiz of fury, and with perfect accuracy of aim, it
might dart at him and strike. If he threw the towel and missed&mdash;it
certainly would.</p>

<p>There were other occupants of the corridor, however, and a sound of
steps approaching gave him the decision to act. He would lose his bath
if he hesitated much longer. He felt ashamed of his timidity, though
&ldquo;pusillanimity&rdquo; was the word thought selected owing to the pulpit
vocabulary it was his habit to prefer. He went with extreme caution
towards the bathroom door, passing the point of danger so close that
his skin turned hot and cold. With one foot gingerly extended, he
recovered his sponge. The hornet did not move a muscle. But&mdash;it had
seen him pass. It merely waited. All dangerous insects had that trick.
It knew quite well he was inside; it knew quite well he must come out a
few minutes later; it also knew quite well that he was&mdash;naked.</p>

<p>Once inside the little room, he closed the door with exceeding
gentleness, lest the vibration might stir the fearful insect to attack.
The bath was already filled, and he plunged to his neck with a feeling
of comparative security. A window into the outside passage he also
closed, so that nothing could possibly come in. And steam soon charged
the air and left its blurred deposit on the glass. For ten minutes
he could enjoy himself and pretend that he was safe. For ten minutes
he did so. He behaved carelessly, as though nothing mattered, and as
though all the courage in the world were his. He splashed and soaped
and sponged, making a lot of reckless noise. He got out and dried
himself. Slowly the steam subsided, the air grew clearer, he put on
dressing-gown and slippers. It was time to go out.</p>

<p>Unable to devise any further reason for delay, he opened the door
softly half an inch&mdash;peeped out&mdash;and instantly closed it again with a
resounding bang. He had heard a drone of wings. The insect had left
its perch and now buzzed upon the floor directly in his path. The air
seemed full of stings; he felt stabs all over him; his unprotected
portions winced with the expectancy of pain. The beast knew he was
coming out, and was waiting for him. In that brief instant he had felt
its sting all over him, on his unprotected ankles, on his back, his
neck, his cheeks, in his eyes, and on the bald clearing that adorned
his Anglican head. Through the closed door he heard the ominous, dull
murmur of his striped adversary as it beat its angry wings. Its oiled
and wicked sting shot in and out with fury. Its deft legs worked. He
saw its tiny waist already writhing with the lust of battle. Ugh! That
tiny waist! A moment&rsquo;s steady nerve and he could have severed that
cunning body from the directing brain with one swift, well-directed
thrust. But his nerve had utterly deserted him.</p>

<p>Human motives, even in the professedly holy, are an involved affair
at any time. Just now, in the Rev. James Milligan, they were quite
inextricably mixed. He claims this explanation, at any rate, in excuse
of his abominable subsequent behaviour. For, exactly at this moment,
when he had decided to admit cowardice by ringing for the Arab servant,
a step was audible in the corridor outside, and courage came with it
into his disreputable heart. It was the step of the man he cordially
&ldquo;disapproved of,&rdquo; using the pulpit version of &ldquo;hated and despised.&rdquo; He
had overstayed his time, and the bath was in demand by Mr. Mullins. Mr.
Mullins invariably followed him at seven-thirty; it was now a quarter
to eight. And Mr. Mullins was a wretched drinking man&mdash;&ldquo;a sot.&rdquo;</p>

<p>In a flash the plan was conceived and put into execution. The
temptation, of course, was of the devil. Mr. Milligan hid the motive
from himself, pretending he hardly recognised it. The plan was what men
call a dirty trick; it was also irresistibly seductive. He opened the
door, stepped boldly, nose in the air, right over the hideous insect
on the floor, and fairly pranced into the outer passage. The brief
transit brought a hundred horrible sensations&mdash;that the hornet would
rise and sting his leg, that it would cling to his dressing-gown and
stab his spine, that he would step upon it and die, like Achilles, of
a heel exposed. But with these, and conquering them, was one other
stronger emotion that robbed the lesser terrors of their potency&mdash;that
Mr. Mullins would run precisely the same risks five seconds later,
unprepared. He heard the gloating insect buzz and scratch the
oil-cloth. But it was behind him. <em>He</em> was safe!</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good morning to you, Mr. Mullins,&rdquo; he observed with a gracious smile.
&ldquo;I trust I have not kept you waiting.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Mornin&rsquo;!&rdquo; grunted Mullins sourly in reply, as he passed him with a
distinctly hostile and contemptuous air. For Mullins, though depraved,
perhaps, was an honest man, abhorring parsons and making no secret of
his opinions&mdash;whence the bitter feeling.</p>

<p>All men, except those very big ones who are supermen, have something
astonishingly despicable in them. The despicable thing in Milligan
came uppermost now. He fairly chuckled. He met the snub with a calm,
forgiving smile, and continued his shambling gait with what dignity he
could towards his bedroom opposite. Then he turned his head to see. His
enemy would meet an infuriated hornet&mdash;an Egyptian hornet!&mdash;and might
not notice it. He might step on it. He might not. But he was bound to
disturb it, and rouse it to attack. The chances were enormously on the
clerical side. And its sting meant death.</p>

<p>&ldquo;May God forgive me!&rdquo; ran subconsciously through his mind. And side by
side with the repentant prayer ran also a recognition of the tempter&rsquo;s
eternal skill: &ldquo;I hope the devil it will sting him!&rdquo;</p>

<p>It happened very quickly. The Rev. James Milligan lingered a moment
by his door to watch. He saw Mullins, the disgusting Mullins, step
blithely into the bathroom passage; he saw him pause, shrink back,
and raise his arm to protect his face. He heard him swear out aloud:
&ldquo;What&rsquo;s the d&mdash;&mdash;d thing doing here? Have I really got &rsquo;em again&mdash;&mdash;?&rdquo;
And then he heard him laugh&mdash;a hearty, guffawing laugh of genuine
relief&mdash;&mdash; &ldquo;It&rsquo;s <em>real</em>!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The moment of revulsion was overwhelming. It filled the churchly heart
with anguish and bitter disappointment. For a space he hated the whole
race of men.</p>

<p>For the instant Mr. Mullins realised that the insect was not a fiery
illusion of his disordered nerves, he went forward without the smallest
hesitation. With his towel he knocked down the flying terror. Then he
stooped. He gathered up the venomous thing his well-aimed blow had
stricken so easily to the floor. He advanced with it, held at arm&rsquo;s
length, to the window. He tossed it out carelessly. The Egyptian hornet
flew away uninjured, and Mr. Mullins&mdash;the Mr. Mullins who drank,
gave nothing to the church, attended no services, hated parsons, and
proclaimed the fact with enthusiasm&mdash;this same detestable Mr. Mullins
went to his unearned bath without a scratch. But first he saw his
enemy standing in the doorway across the passage, watching him&mdash;and
understood. That was the awful part of it. Mullins would make a story
of it, and the story would go the round of the hotel.</p>

<p>The Rev. James Milligan, however, proved that his reputation for
self-control was not undeserved. He conducted morning service half
an hour later with an expression of peace upon his handsome face. He
conquered all outward sign of inward spiritual vexation; the wicked, he
consoled himself, ever flourish like green bay trees. It was notorious
that the righteous never have any luck at all! That was bad enough.
But what was worse&mdash;and the Rev. James Milligan remembered for very
long&mdash;was the superior ease with which Mullins had relegated both
himself and hornet to the same level of comparative insignificance.
Mullins ignored them both&mdash;which proved that he felt himself superior.
Infinitely worse than the sting of any hornet in the world: he really
<em>was</em> superior.</p>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
