<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			

  <h2 class="mt3"><br />

CAIN&rsquo;S ATONEMENT</h2>


<p>So many thousands to-day have deliberately put Self aside, and are
ready to yield their lives for an ideal, that it is not surprising a
few of them should have registered experiences of a novel order. For
to step aside from Self is to enter a larger world, to be open to new
impressions. If Powers of Good exist in the universe at all, they can
hardly be inactive at the present time.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>The case of two men, who may be called Jones and Smith, occurs to the
mind in this connection. Whether a veil actually was lifted for a
moment, or whether the tension of long and terrible months resulted in
an exaltation of emotion, the experience claims significance. Smith,
to whom the experience came, holds the firm belief that it was real.
Jones, though it involved him too, remained unaware.</p>

<p>It is a somewhat personal story, their peculiar relationship dating
from early youth: a kind of unwilling antipathy was born between them,
yet an antipathy that had no touch of hate or even of dislike. It was
rather in the nature of an instinctive rivalry. Some tie operated that
flung them ever into the same arena with strange persistence, and ever
as opponents. An inevitable fate delighted to throw them together in a
sense that made them rivals; small as well as large affairs betrayed
this malicious tendency of the gods. It showed itself in earliest
days, at school, at Cambridge, in travel, even in house-parties
and the lighter social intercourse. Though distant cousins, their
families were not intimate, and there was no obvious reason why their
paths should fall so persistently together. Yet their paths did so,
crossing and recrossing in the way described. Sooner or later, in
all his undertakings, Smith would note the shadow of Jones darkening
the ground in front of him; and later, when called to the Bar in his
chosen profession, he found most frequently that the learned counsel
in opposition to him was the owner of this shadow, Jones. In another
matter, too, they became rivals, for the same girl, oddly enough,
attracted both, and though she accepted neither offer of marriage
(during Smith&rsquo;s lifetime!), the attitude between them was that of
unwilling rivals. For they were friends as well.</p>

<p>Jones, it appears, was hardly aware that any rivalry existed; he did
not think of Smith as an opponent, and as an adversary, never. He did
notice, however, the constantly recurring meetings, for more than once
he commented on them with good-humoured amusement. Smith, on the other
hand, was conscious of a depth and strength in the tie that certainly
intrigued him; being of a thoughtful, introspective nature, he was
keenly sensible of the strange competition in their lives, and sought
in various ways for its explanation, though without success. The desire
to find out was very strong in him. And this was natural enough, owing
to the singular fact that in all their battles he was the one to lose.
Invariably Jones got the best of every conflict. Smith always paid;
sometimes he paid with interest.</p>

<p>Occasionally, too, he seemed forced to injure himself while
contributing to his cousin&rsquo;s success. It was very curious. He reflected
much upon it; he wondered what the origin of their tie and rivalry
might be, but especially why it was that he invariably lost, and why
he was so often obliged to help his rival to the point even of his own
detriment. Tempted to bitterness sometimes, he did not yield to it,
however; the relationship remained frank and pleasant; if anything, it
deepened.</p>

<p>
He remembered once, for instance, giving his cousin a chance
introduction which yet led, a little later, to the third party offering
certain evidence which lost him an important case&mdash;Jones, of course,
winning it. The third party, too, angry at being dragged into the case,
turned hostile to him, thwarting various subsequent projects. In no
other way could Jones have procured this particular evidence; he did
not know of its existence even. That chance introduction did it all.
There was nothing the least dishonourable on the part of Jones&mdash;it
was just the chance of the dice. The dice were always loaded against
Smith&mdash;and there were other instances of similar kind.</p>

<p>About this time, moreover, a singular feeling that had lain vaguely
in his mind for some years past, took more definite form. It suddenly
assumed the character of a conviction, that yet had no evidence to
support it. A voice, long whispering in the depths of him, became
much louder, grew into a statement that he accepted without further
ado: &ldquo;I&rsquo;m paying off a debt,&rdquo; he phrased it, &ldquo;an old, old debt is
being discharged. I owe him this&mdash;my help and so forth.&rdquo; He accepted
it, that is, as just; and this certainty of justice kept sweet his
heart and mind, shutting the door on bitterness or envy. The thought,
however, though it recurred persistently with each encounter, brought
no explanation.</p>

<p>When the war broke out both offered their services; as members of the
O.T.C., they got commissions quickly; but it was a chance remark of
Smith&rsquo;s that made his friend join the very regiment he himself was in.
They trained together, were in the same retreats and the same advances
together. Their friendship deepened. Under the stress of circumstances
the tie did not dissolve, but strengthened. It was indubitably real,
therefore. Then, oddly enough, they were both wounded in the same
engagement.</p>

<p>And it was here the remarkable fate that jointly haunted them betrayed
itself more clearly than in any previous incident of their long
relationship&mdash;Smith was wounded in the act of protecting his cousin.
How it happened is confusing to a layman, but each apparently was
leading a bombing-party, and the two parties came together. They found
themselves shoulder to shoulder, both brimmed with that pluck which
is complete indifference to Self; they exchanged a word of excited
greeting; and the same second one of those rare opportunities of
advantage presented itself which only the highest courage could make
use of. Neither, certainly, was thinking of personal reward; it was
merely that each saw the chance by which instant heroism might gain a
surprise advantage for their side. The risk was heavy, but there <em class="italic">was</em>
a chance; and success would mean a decisive result, to say nothing of
high distinction for the man who obtained it&mdash;if he survived. Smith,
being a few yards ahead of his cousin, had the moment in his grasp.
He was in the act of dashing forward when something made him pause.
A bomb in mid-air, flung from the opposing trench, was falling; it
seemed immediately above him; he saw that it would just miss himself,
but land full upon his cousin&mdash;whose head was turned the other way. By
stretching out his hand, Smith knew he could field it like a cricket
ball. There was an interval of a second and a half, he judged. He
hesitated&mdash;perhaps a quarter of a second&mdash;then he acted. He caught it.
It was the obvious thing to do. He flung it back into the opposing
trench.</p>

<p>The rapidity of thought is hard to realise. In that second and a
half Smith was aware of many things: He saved his cousin&rsquo;s life
unquestionably; unquestionably also Jones seized the opportunity that
otherwise was his cousin&rsquo;s. But it was neither of these reflections
that filled Smith&rsquo;s mind. The dominant impression was another. It
flashed into actual words inside his excited brain: &ldquo;I must risk it. I
owe it to him&mdash;and more besides!&rdquo; He was, further, aware of another
impulse than the obvious one. In the first fraction of a second it was
overwhelmingly established. And it was this: that the entire episode
was familiar to him. A subtle familiarity was present. All this had
happened before. He had already&mdash;somewhere, somehow&mdash;seen death
descending upon his cousin from the air. Yet with a difference. The
&ldquo;difference&rdquo; escaped him; the familiarity was vivid. That he missed the
deadly detonators in making the catch, or that the fuse delayed, he
called good luck. He only remembers that he flung the gruesome weapon
back whence it had come, and that its explosion in the opposite trench
materially helped his cousin to find glory in the place of death. The
slight delay, however, resulted in his receiving a bullet through the
chest&mdash;a bullet he would not otherwise have received, presumably.</p>

<p>It was some days later, gravely wounded, that he discovered his cousin
in another bed across the darkened floor. They exchanged remarks. Jones
was already &ldquo;decorated,&rdquo; it seemed, having snatched success from his
cousin&rsquo;s hands, while little aware whose help had made it easier.&thinsp;...
And once again there stole across the inmost mind of Smith that
strange, insistent whisper: &ldquo;I owed it to him ... but, by God, I owe
more than that ... I mean to pay it too&thinsp;...!&rdquo;</p>

<p>There was not a trace of bitterness or envy now; only this profound
conviction, of obscurest origin, that it was right and absolutely
just&mdash;full, honest repayment of a debt incurred. Some ancient balance
of account was being settled; there was no &ldquo;chance&rdquo;; injustice and
caprice played no role at all.&thinsp;... And a deeper understanding of life&rsquo;s
ironies crept into him; for if everything was <em class="italic">just</em>, there was no room
for whimpering.</p>

<p>And the voice persisted above the sound of busy footsteps in the ward:
&ldquo;I owe it ... I&rsquo;ll pay it gladly&thinsp;...!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Through the pain and weakness the whisper died away. He was exhausted.
There were periods of unconsciousness, but there were periods
of half-consciousness as well; then flashes of another kind of
consciousness altogether, when, bathed in high, soft light, he was
aware of things he could not quite account for. He <em class="italic">saw</em>. It was
absolutely real. Only, the critical faculty was gone. He did not
question what he saw, as he stared across at his cousin&rsquo;s bed. He
knew. Perhaps the beaten, worn-out body let something through at last.
The nerves, over-strained to numbness, lay very still. The physical
system, battered and depleted, made no cry. The clamour of the flesh
was hushed. He was aware, however, of an undeniable exaltation of the
spirit in him, as he lay and gazed towards his cousin&rsquo;s bed.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>Across the night of time, it seemed to him, the picture stole before
his inner eye with a certainty that left no room for doubt. It was not
the cells of memory in his brain of To-day that gave up their dead, it
was the eternal Self in him that remembered and understood&mdash;the soul.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>With that satisfaction which is born of full comprehension, he watched
the light glow and spread about the little bed. Thick matting deadened
the footsteps of nurses, orderlies, doctors. New cases were brought
in, &ldquo;old&rdquo; cases were carried out; he ignored them; he saw only the
light above his cousin&rsquo;s bed grow stronger. He lay still and stared. It
came neither from the ceiling nor the floor; it unfolded like a cloud
of shining smoke. And the little lamp, the sheets, the figure framed
between them&mdash;all these slid cleverly away and vanished utterly. He
stood in another place that had lain behind all these appearances&mdash;a
landscape with wooded hills, a foaming river, the sun just sinking
below the forest, and dusk creeping from a gorge along the lonely
banks. In the warm air there was a perfume of great flowers and
heavy-scented trees; there were fire-flies, and the taste of spray from
the tumbling river was on his lips. Across the water a large bird,
flapped its heavy wings, as it moved down-stream to find another
fishing place. For he and his companion had disturbed it as they broke
out of the thick foliage and reached the river-bank. The companion,
moreover, was his brother; they ever hunted together; there was a
passionate link between them born of blood and of affection&mdash;they were
twins.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>It all was as clear as though of Yesterday. In his heart was the lust
of the hunt; in his blood was the lust of woman; and thick behind these
lurked the jealousy and fierce desire of a primitive day. But, though
clear as of Yesterday, he knew that it was of long, long ago.&thinsp;... And
his brother came up close beside him, resting his bloody spear with a
clattering sound against the boulders on the shore. He saw the gleaming
of the metal in the sunset, he saw the shining glitter of the spray
upon the boulders, he saw his brother&rsquo;s eyes look straight into his
own. And in them shone a light that was neither the reflection of the
sunset, nor the excitement of the hunt just over.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It escaped us,&rdquo; said his brother. &ldquo;Yet I know my first spear struck.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It followed the fawn that crossed,&rdquo; was the reply. &ldquo;Besides, we
came down wind, thus giving it warning. Our flocks, at any rate, are
safer&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>The other laughed significantly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is not the safety of our flocks that troubles me just now,
brother,&rdquo; he interrupted eagerly, while the light burned more deeply in
his eyes. &ldquo;It is, rather, that <em class="italic">she</em> waits for me by the fire across
the river, and that I would get to her. With your help added to my
love,&rdquo; he went on in a trusting voice, &ldquo;the gods have shown me the
favour of true happiness!&rdquo; He pointed with his spear to a camp-fire
on the farther bank, turning his head as he strode to plunge into the
stream and swim across.</p>

<p>For an instant, then, the other felt his natural love turn into bitter
hate. His own fierce passion, unconfessed, concealed, burst into
instant flame. That the girl should become his brother&rsquo;s wife sent the
blood surging through his veins in fury. He felt his life and all that
he desired go down in ashes.&thinsp;... He watched his brother stride towards
the water, the deer-skin cast across one naked shoulder&mdash;when another
object caught his practised eye. In mid-air it passed suddenly, like
a shining gleam; it seemed to hang a second; then it swept swiftly
forward past his head&mdash;and downward. It had leaped with a blazing fury
from the overhanging bank behind; he saw the blood still streaming
from its wounded flank. It must land&mdash;he saw it with a secret, awful
pleasure&mdash;full upon the striding figure, whose head was turned away!</p>

<p>The swiftness of that leap, however, was not so swift but that he could
easily have used his spear. Indeed, he gripped it strongly. His skill,
his strength, his aim&mdash;he knew them well enough. But hate and love,
fastening upon his heart, held all his muscles still. He hesitated. He
was no murderer, yet he paused. He heard the roar, the ugly thud, the
crash, the cry for help&mdash;too late ... and when, an instant afterwards,
his steel plunged into the great beast&rsquo;s heart, the human heart and
life he might have saved lay still for ever.&thinsp;... He heard the water
rushing past, an icy wind came down the gorge against his naked back,
he saw the fire shine upon the farther bank ... and the figure of a
girl in skins was wading across, seeking out the shallow places in the
dusk, and calling wildly as she came.&thinsp;... Then darkness hid the entire
landscape, yet a darkness that was deeper, bluer than the velvet of the
night alone.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>And he shrieked aloud in his remorseful anguish: &ldquo;May the gods forgive
me, for I did not mean it! Oh, that I might undo ... that I might
repay&thinsp;...!&rdquo;</p>

<p>That his cries disturbed the weary occupants in more than one bed is
certain, but he remembers chiefly that a nurse was quickly by his side,
and that something she gave him soothed his violent pain and helped
him into deeper sleep again. There was, he noticed, anyhow, no longer
the soft, clear, blazing light about his cousin&rsquo;s bed. He saw only the
faint glitter of the oil-lamps down the length of the great room.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>And some weeks later he went back to fight. The picture, however, never
left his memory. It stayed with him as an actual reality that was
neither delusion nor hallucination. He believed that he understood at
last the meaning of the tie that had fettered him and puzzled him so
long. The memory of those far-off days of shepherding beneath the stars
of long ago remained vividly beside him. He kept his secret, however.
In many a talk with his cousin beneath the nearer stars of Flanders no
word of it ever passed his lips.</p>

<p>The friendship between them, meanwhile, experienced a curious
deepening, though unacknowledged in any spoken words. Smith, at any
rate, on his side, put into it an affection that was a brave man&rsquo;s
love. He watched over his cousin. In the fighting especially, when
possible, he sought to protect and shield him, regardless of his own
personal safety. He delighted secretly in the honours his cousin had
already won. He himself was not yet even mentioned in dispatches, and
no public distinction of any kind had come his way.</p>

<p>His V.C. eventually&mdash;well, he was no longer occupying his body when it
was bestowed. He had already &ldquo;left.&rdquo;... He was now conscious, possibly,
of other experiences besides that one of ancient, primitive days when
he and his brother were shepherding beneath other stars. But the
reckless heroism which saved his cousin under fire may later enshrine
another memory which, at some far future time, shall reawaken as a
&ldquo;hallucination&rdquo; from a Past that to-day is called the Present.&thinsp;... The
notion, at any rate, flashed across his mind before he &ldquo;left.&rdquo;</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
