Miss Daphne Slumbubble was a nervous lady of
uncertain age who invariably went abroad in
the spring. It was her one annual holiday, and she
slaved for it all the rest of the year, saving money by
the many sad devices known only to those who find
their incomes after forty “barely enough,” and always
hoping that something would one day happen to bet-
ter her dreary condition of cheap tea, tin loaves, and
weekly squabbles with the laundress.
M
This spring holiday was the only time she really
lived in the whole year, and she half starved herself
for months immediately after her return, so as to put
by quickly enough money for the journey in the fol-
lowing year. Once those six pounds were safe she felt
better. After that she only had to save so many sums
of four francs, each four francs meaning another day
in the little cheap pension she always went to on the
flowery slopes of the Alps of Valais.
Miss Slumbubble was exceedingly conscious of the
presence of men. They made her nervous and afraid.
She thought in her heart that all men were untrust-
worthy, not excepting policemen and clergymen, for
in her early youth she had been cruelly deceived by a
man to whom she had unreservedly given her heart.
He had suddenly gone away and left her without a
word of explanation, and some months later had
married another woman and allowed the announce-
ment to appear in the papers. It is true that he had
hardly once spoken to Daphne. But that was nothing.
For the way he looked at her, the way he walked
about the room, the very way he avoided her at the
tea-parties where she used to meet him at her rich
sister’s house—indeed, everything he did or left
undone, brought convincing proof to her fluttering
heart that he loved her secretly, and that he knew she
loved him. His near presence disturbed her dread-
fully, so much so that she invariably spilt her tea if he
came even within scenting-distance of her; and once,
when he crossed the room to offer her bread and
butter, she was so certain the very way he held the
plate interpreted his silent love, that she rose from
her chair, looked straight into his eyes—and took the
whole plate in a state of delicious confusion!
But all this was years ago, and she had long since
learned to hold her grief in subjection and to prevent
her life being too much embittered by the treachery
—she felt it was treachery—of one man. She still,
however, felt anxious and self-conscious in the pres-
ence of men, especially of silent, unmarried men, and
to some extent it may be said that this fear haunted
her life. It was shared, however, with other fears,
probably all equally baseless. Thus, she lived in con-
stant dread of fire, of railway accidents, of runaway
cabs, and of being locked into a small, confined
space. The former fears she shared, of course, with
many other persons of both sexes, but the latter, the
dread of confined spaces, was entirely due, no doubt,
to a story she had heard in early youth to the effect
that her father had once suffered from that singular
nervous malady, claustrophobia (the fear of closed
spaces), the terror of being caught in a confined place
without possibility of escape.
Thus it was clear that Miss Daphne Slumbubble,
this good, honest soul with jet flowers in her bonnet
and rows of coloured photographs of Switzerland on
her bedroom mantelpiece, led a life unnecessarily
haunted.
The thought of the annual holiday, however, com-
pensated for all else. In her lonely room behind War-
wick Square she stewed through the dusty heat of
summer, fought her way pluckily through the freez-
ing winter fogs, and then, with the lengthening days,
worked herself steadily into a fever heat of joyous
anticipation as she counted the hours to the taking of
her ticket in the first week of May. When the day
came her happiness was so great that she wished for
nothing else in the world. Even her name ceased to
trouble her, for once on the other side of the Channel
it sounded quite different on the lips of the foreign-
ers, while in the little pension she was known as
“Mlle. Daphne,” and the mere sound brought music
into her heart. The odious surname belonged to the
sordid London life. It had nothing to do with the glo-
rious days that Mlle. Daphne spent among the moun-
tain tops.
The platform at Victoria was already crowded
when she arrived a good hour before the train
started, and got her tiny faded trunk weighed and
labelled. She was so excited that she talked unneces-
sarily to any one who would listen—to any one in sta-
tion uniform, that is. Already in fancy she saw the
blue sky above the shining snow peaks, heard the tin-
kling cow-bells, and sniffed the odours of pinewood
and sawmill. She imagined the cheerful table d’hôte
room with its wooden floor and rows of chairs; the
diligence winding up the hot white road far below;
the fragrant café complet in her bedroom at 7.30—
and then the long mornings with sketch-book and
poetry-book under the forest shade, the clouds trail-
ing slowly across the great cliffs, and the air always
humming with the echoes of falling water.
“And you feel sure the passage will be calm, do
you?” she asked the porter for the third time, as she
bustled to and fro by his side.
“Well, there ain’t no wind ’ere, at any rate, Miss,”
he replied cheerfully, putting her small box on a bar-
row.
“Such a lot of people go by this train, don’t they?”
she piped.
“Oh, a tidy few. This is the season for foreign
parts, I suppose.”
“Yes, yes; and the trains on the other side will be
very full, too, I dare say,” she said, following him
down the platform with quick, pattering footsteps,
chirping all the way like a happy bird.
“Quite likely, Miss.”
“I shall go in a ‘Ladies only,’ you know. I always
do every year. I think it’s safer, isn’t it?”
“I’ll see to it all for yer, Miss,” replied the patient
porter. “But the train ain’t in yet, not for another ’arf
hour or so.”
“Oh, thank you; then I’ll be here when it comes.
‘Ladies only,’ remember, and second class, and a cor-
ner seat facing the engine—no, back to the engine, I
mean; and I do hope the Channel will be smooth. Do
you think the wind—?”
But the porter was out of hearing by this time,
and Miss Slumbubble went wandering about the plat-
form watching the people arrive, studying the blue
and yellow advertisements of the Côte d’azur, and
waggling her jet beads with delight—with passionate
delight—as she thought of her own little village in
time high Alps where the snow crept down to a few
hundred feet above the church and the meadows
were greener than any in the whole wide world.
“I’ve put yer wraps in a ‘Lidies only,’ Miss,” said
the porter at length, when the train came in,“and
you’ve got the corner back to the engine all to yerself,
an’ quite comfortable. Thank you, Miss.” He touched
his cap and pocketed his sixpence, and the fussy little
traveller went off to take up her position outside the
carriage door for another half hour before the train
started. She was always very nervous about trains;
not only fearful of possible accidents to the engine
and carriages, but of untoward happenings to the
occupants of corridor-less compartments during long
journeys without stops. The mere sight of a railway
station, with its smoke and whistling and luggage,
was sufficient to set her imagination in the direction
of possible disaster.
The careful porter had piled all her belongings
neatly in the corner for her: three newspapers, a mag-
azine and a novel, a little bag to carry food in, two
bananas and a Bath bun in paper, a bundle of wraps
tied with a long strap, an umbrella, a bottle of
Yanatas, an opera-glass (for the mountains), and a
camera. She counted them all over, rearranged them
a little differently, and then sighed a bit, partly from
excitement, partly by way of protest at time delay.
A number of people came up and eyed the com-
partment critically and seemed on the point of get-
ting in, but no one actually took possession. One lady
put her umbrella in the corner, and then came tear-
ing down the platform a few minutes later to take it
away again, as though she had suddenly heard the
train was not to start at all. There was much bustling
to and fro, and a good deal of French was audible,
and the sound of it thrilled Miss Daphne with hap-
piness, for it was another delightful little anticipation
of what was to come. Even the language sounded like
a holiday, and brought with it a whiff of mountains
and the subtle pleasures of sweet freedom.
Then a fat Frenchman arrived and inspected the
carriage, and attempted to climb in. But she instantly
pounced upon him in courageous dismay.
“Mais, c’est pour dames, m’sieur!” she cried, pro-
nouncing it “dam.”
“Oh, damn!” he exclaimed in English; “I didn’t
notice.” And the rudeness of the man—it was the fur
coat over his arm made her think he was French—set
her all in a flutter, so that she jumped in and took her
seat hurriedly, and spread her many parcels in a pro-
tective and prohibitive way about her.
For the tenth time she opened her black beaded
bag and took out her purse and made sure her ticket
was in it, and then counted over her belongings.
“I do hope,” she murmured, “I do hope that stupid
porter has put in my luggage all right, and that the
Channel won’t be rough. Porters are so stupid. One
ought never to lose sight of them till the luggage is
actually in. I think I’d better pay the extra fare and go
first class on the boat if it is rough. I can carry all my
own packages, I think.”
At that moment the man came for tickets. She
searched everywhere for her own, but could not find
it.
“I’m certain I had it a moment ago,” she said
breathlessly, while the man stood waiting at the open
door. “I know I had it—only this very minute. Dear
me, what can I have done with it? Ah here it is!”
The man took so long examining the little tourist
cover that she was afraid something must he wrong
with it, and when at last he tore out a leaf and
handed back the rest a sort of panic seized her.
“It’s all right, isn’t it, guard? I mean I’m all right,
am I not?” she asked.
The guard closed the door and locked it.
“All right for Folkestone, ma’am,” he said, and
was gone.
There was much whistling and shouting and run-
ning up and down the platform, and the inspector
was standing with his hand raised and the whistle at
his lips, waiting to blow and looking cross. Suddenly
her own porter flew past with an empty barrow. She
dashed her head out of the window and hailed him.
“You’re sure you put my luggage in aren’t, you?”
she cried. The man did not or would not hear, and as
the train moved slowly off she bumped her head
against an old lady standing on the platform who was
looking the other way and waving to some one in a
front carriage.
“Ooh!” cried Miss Slumbubble, straightening her
bonnet, “you really should look where you’re looking,
madam!”—and then, realising she had said some-
thing foolish, she withdrew into the carriage and
sank back in a fluster on the cushions.
“Oh!” she gasped again, “oh dear! I’m actually off
at last. It’s too good to be true. Oh, that horrid
London!”
Then she counted her money over again, exam-
ined her ticket once more, and touched each of her
many packages with a long finger in a cotton glove,
saying, “That’s there, and that, and that, and—that!”
And then turning and pointing at herself she added,
with a little happy laugh, “and that!”
The train gathered speed, and the dirty roofs and
sea of ugly chimneys flew by as the dreary miles of
depressing suburbs revealed themselves through the
windows. She put all her parcels up in the rack and
then took them all down again; and after a bit she
put a few up—a carefully selected few that she would
not need till Folkestone—and arranged the others,
some upon the seat beside her, and some opposite.
The paper bag of bananas she kept in her lap, where
it grew warmer and warmer and more and more
dishevelled in appearance.
“Actually off at last!” she murmured again, catch-
ing her breath a little in her joy. “Paris, Berne, Thun,
Frutigen,” she gave herself a little hug that made the
jet beads rattle; “then the long diligence journey up
those gorgeous mountains,” she knew every inch of
the way, “and a clear fifteen days at the pension, or
even eighteen days, if I can get the cheaper room.
Wheeeee! Can it be true? Can it be really true?” In
her happiness she made sounds just like a bird.
She looked out of the window, where green fields
had replaced the rows of streets. She opened her
novel and tried to read. She played with the newspa-
pers in a vain attempt to keep her eye on any one col-
umn. It was all in vain. A scene of wild beauty held
her inner eye and made all else dull and uninterest-
ing. The train sped on—slowly enough to her—yet
every moment of the journey, every turn of the creak-
ing wheels that brought her nearer, every little detail
of the familiar route, became a source of keenest
anticipatory happiness to her. She no longer cared
about her name, or her silent and faithless lover of
long ago, or of anything in the world but the fact that
her absorbing little annual passion was now once
again in a fair way to be gratified.
Then, quite suddenly, Miss Slumbubble realised
her actual position, and felt afraid, unreasonably
afraid. For the first time she became conscious that
she was alone, alone in the compartment of an
express train, and not even of a corridor express
train.
Hitherto the excitement of getting off had occu-
pied her mind to the exclusion of everything else, and
if she had realised her solitude at all, she had realised
it pleasurably. But now, in the first pause for breath
as it were, when she had examined her packages,
counted her money, glared at her ticket, and all the
rest of it for the twentieth time, she leaned back in
her seat and knew with a distinct shock that she was
alone in a railway carriage on a comparatively long
journey, alone for the first time in her life in a rat-
tling, racing, shrieking train. She sat bolt upright and
tried to collect herself a little.
Of all the emotions, that of fear is probably the
least susceptible to the power of suggestion, certainly
of auto-suggestion; and of vague fear that has no
obvious cause this is especially true. With a fear of
known origin one can argue, humour it, pacify, turn
on the hose of ridicule—in a word, suggest that it
depart; but with a fear that rises stealthily out of no
comprehensible causes the mind finds itself at a com-
plete loss. The mere assertion “I am not afraid” is as
useless and empty as the subtler kind of suggestion
that lies in affecting to ignore it altogether. Searching
for the cause, moreover, tends to confuse the mind,
and searching in vain, to terrify.
Miss Slumbubble pulled herself sharply together,
and began to search for what made her afraid, but for
a long time she searched in vain.
At first she searched externally: she thought per-
haps it had something to do with one of her pack-
ages, and she placed them all out in a row on the seat
in front of her and examined each in turn, bananas,
camera, food bag, black bead bag, &c. &c. But she dis-
covered nothing among them to cause alarm.
Then she searched internally: her thoughts, her
rooms in London, her pension, her money, ticket,
plans in general, her future, her past, her health, her
religion, anything and everything among the events
of her inner life she passed in review, yet found noth-
ing that could have caused this sudden sense of being
troubled and afraid.
Moreover, as she vainly searched, her fear
increased. She got into a regular nervous flurry.
“I declare if I’m not all in a perspiration!” she
exclaimed aloud, and shifted down the dirty cushions
to another place, looking anxiously about her as she
did so. She probed everywhere in her thoughts to
find the reason of her fear, but could think of noth-
ing. Yet in her soul there was a sense of growing dis-
tress.
She found her new seat no more comfortable
than the one before it, and shifted in turn into all the
corners of the carriage, and down the middle as well,
till at last she had tried every possible part of it. In
each place she felt less at ease than in the one before.
She got up and looked into the empty racks, under
the seats, beneath the heavy cushions, which she
lifted with difficulty. Then she put all the packages
back again into the rack, dropping several of them in
her nervous hurry, and being obliged to kneel on the
floor to recover them from under the seats. This
made her breathless. Moreover, the dust got into her
throat and made her cough. Her eyes smarted and
she grew uncomfortably warm. Then, quite acciden-
tally, she caught sight of her reflection in the
coloured picture of Boulogne under the rack, and the
appearance she presented added greatly to her dis-
may. She looked so unlike herself, and wore such an
odd expression. It was almost like the face of another
person altogether.
The sense of alarm, once wakened, is fed by any-
thing and everything, from a buzzing fly to a dark
cloud in the sky. The woman collapsed on to the seat
behind her in a distressing fluster of nervous fear.
But Miss Daphne Slumbubble had pluck. She was
not so easily dismayed after all. She had read some-
where that terror was sometimes dispersed by the
loud and strong affirmation of one’s own name. She
believed much that she read, provided it was plainly
and vigorously expressed, and she acted at once on
this knowledge.
“I am Daphne Slumbubble!” she affirmed in a firm,
confident tone of voice, sitting stiffly on the edge of
the seat; “I am not afraid—of anything.” She added
the last two words as an afterthought. “I am Daphne
Slumbubble, and I have paid for my ticket, and know
where I am going, and my luggage is in the van, and I
have all my smaller things here!” She enumerated
them one by one; she omitted nothing.
Yet the sound of her own voice, and especially of
her own name, added apparently to her distress. It
sounded oddly, like a voice outside the carriage.
Everything seemed suddenly to have become strange,
and unfamiliar, and unfriendly. She moved across to
the opposite corner and looked out of the window:
trees, fields, and occasional country houses flew past
in endless swift succession. The country looked
charming; she saw rooks flying and farm-horses mov-
ing laboriously over the fields. What in the world was
there to feel afraid of? What in the world made her so
restless and fidgety and frightened? Once again she
examined her packages, her ticket, her money. All
was right.
Then she dashed across to the window and tried
to open it. The sash stuck. She pulled and pulled in
vain. The sash refused to yield. She ran to the other
window, with a like result. Both were closed. Both
refused to open. Her fear grew. She was locked in!
The windows would not open. Something was wrong
with the carriage. She suddenly recalled the way
every one had examined it and refused to enter.
There must be something the matter with the car-
riage—something she had omitted to observe. Terror
ran like a flame through her. She trembled and was
ready to cry.
She ran up and down between the cushioned
seats like a bird in a cage, casting wild glances at the
racks and under the seats and out of the windows. A
sudden panic took her, and she tried to open the
door. It was locked. She flew to the other door. That,
too, was locked. Good Heavens, both were locked!
She was locked in. She was a prisoner. She was
caught in a closed space. The mountains were out of
her reach—the free open woods—the wide fields, the
scented winds of heaven. She was caught, hemmed
in, celled, restricted like a prisoner in a dungeon. The
thought maddened her. The feeling that she could
not reach the open spaces of sky and forest, of field
and blue horizon, struck straight into her soul and
touched all that she held most dear. She screamed.
She ran down between the cushioned seats and
screamed aloud.
Of course, no one heard her. The thunder of the
train killed the feeble sound of her voice. Her voice
was the cry of the imprisoned person.
Then quite suddenly she understood what it all
meant. There was nothing wrong with the carriage,
or with her parcels, or with the train. She sat down
abruptly upon the dirty cushions and faced the posi-
tion there and then. It had nothing to do with her
past or her future, her ticket or her money, her reli-
gion or her health. It was something else entirely. She
knew what it was, and the knowledge brought icy ter-
ror at once. She had at last labelled the source of her
consternation, and the discovery increased rather
than lessened her distress.
It was the fear of closed spaces. It was claustro-
phobia!
There could no longer be any doubt about it. She
was shut in. She was enclosed in a narrow space from
which she could not escape. The walls and floor and
ceiling shut her in implacably. The doors was fas-
tened; the windows were sealed, there was no escape.
“That porter might have told me!” she exclaimed
inconsequently, mopping her face. Then the foolish-
ness of the saying dawned upon her, and she thought
her mind must be going. That was the effect of
claustrophobia, she remembered: the mind went, and
one said and did foolish things. Oh, to get out into a
free open space, uncornered! Here she was trapped,
horribly trapped.
“The guard man should never have locked me in—
never!” she cried, and ran up and down between the
seats, throwing her weight first against the door and
then against the other. Of course, fortunately, neither
of them yielded.
Thinking food might calm her, perhaps, she took
down the banana bag and peeled the squashy over-
ripe fruit, munching it with part of the Bath bun from
the other bag, and sitting midway on the forward
seat. Suddenly the right-hand window dropped with
a bang and a rattle. It had only been stuck after all,
and her efforts, aided by the shaking of the train, had
completed its undoing, or rather its unclosing. Miss
Slumbubble shrieked, and dropped her banana and
bun.
But the shock passed in a moment when she saw
what had happened, and that the window was open
and the sweet air pouring in from the flying fields.
She rushed up and put her head out. This was fol-
lowed by her hand, for she meant to open the door
from the outside if possible. Whatever happened, the
one imperative thing was that she must get into open
space. The handle turned easily enough, but the door
was locked higher up and she could not make it
budge. She put her head farther out, so that the wind
tore the jet bonnet off her head and left it twirling in
the dusty whirlwind on the line far behind, and this
sensation of the air whistling past her ears and
through her flying hair somehow or other managed
to make her feel wilder than ever. In fact, she com-
pletely lost her head, and began to scream at the top
of her voice:
“I’m locked in! I’m a prisoner! Help, help!” she
yelled.
A window opened in the next compartment and a
young man put his head out.
“What the deuce is the matter? Are you being
murdered?” he shouted down the wind.
“I’m locked in! I’m locked in!” screamed the hat-
less lady, wrestling furiously with the obdurate door
handle.
“Don’t open the door!” cried the young man anx-
iously.
“I can’t, you idiot! I can’t!”
“Wait a moment and I’ll come to you. Don’t try to
get out. I’ll climb along the foot-board. Keep calm,
madam, keep calm. I’ll save you.”
He disappeared from view. Good Heavens! He
meant to crawl out and come to her carriage by the
window! A man, a young man, would shortly be in
the compartment with her. Locked in, too! No, it was
impossible. That was worse than the claustrophobia,
and she could not endure such a thing for a moment.
The young man would certainly kill her and steal all
her packages.
She ran once or twice frantically up and down the
narrow floor. Then she looked out of the window.
“Oh, bless my heart and soul!” she cried out, “he’s
out already!”
The young man, evidently thinking the lady was
being assaulted, had climbed out of the window and
was pluckily coming to her rescue. He was already on
the foot-board, swinging by the brass bars on the side
of the coach as the train rocked down the line at a
fearful pace.
But Miss Slumbubble took a deep breath and a
sudden determination. She did, in fact, the only thing
left to her to do. She pulled the communication cord
once, twice three times, and then drew the window
up with a sudden snap just before the young man’s
head appeared round the corner of the sash. Then,
stepping backwards, she trod on the slippery banana
bag and fell flat on her back upon the dirty floor
between the seats.
The train slackened speed almost immediately
and came to a stop. Miss Slumbubble still sat on the
floor, staring in a dazed fashion at her toes. She
realised the enormity of her offence, and was thor-
oughly frightened. She had actually pulled the cord!
—the cord that is meant to be seen but not touched,
the little chain that meant a £5 fine and all sorts of
dire consequences.
She heard voices shouting and doors opening,
and a moment later a key rattled near her head, and
she saw the guard swinging up on to the steps of the
carriage. The door was wide open, and the young
man from the next compartment was explaining vol-
ubly what he seen and heard.
“I thought it was murder,” he was saying.
But the guard pushed quickly into the carriage
and lifted the panting and dishevelled lady on to the
seat.
“Now, what’s all this about? Was it you that pulled
the cord, ma’am?” he asked somewhat roughly. “It’s
serious stoppin’ a train like this, you know, a mail
train.”
Now Miss Daphne did not mean to tell a lie. It
was not deliberate, that is to say. It seemed to slip out
of its own accord as the most natural and obvious
thing to say. For she was terrified at what she had
done, and had to find a good excuse. Yet, how in the
world could she describe to this stupid and hurried
official all she had gone through? Moreover, he
would be so certain to think she was merely drunk.
“It was a man,” she said, falling back instinctively
upon her natural enemy. “There’s a man somewhere!”
She glanced round at the racks and under the seats.
The guard followed her eyes.
“I don’t see no man,” he declared; “all I know is
you’ve stopped the mail train without any visible or
reasonable cause. “I’ll be obliged with your name and
address, ma’am, if you please,” he added, taking a
dirty note-book from his pocket and wetting the
blunt pencil in his mouth.
“Let me get air—at once,” she said. “I must have
air first. Of course you shall have my name. The
whole affair is disgraceful.” She was getting her wits
back. She moved to the door.
“That may be, ma’am,” the man said, “but I’ve my
duty to perform, and I must report the facts, and
then get the train on as quick as possible. You must
stay in the carriage, please. We’ve been waiting ’ere a
bit too long already.”
Miss Slumbubble met her fate calmly. She
realised it was not fair to keep all the passengers
waiting while she got a little fresh air. There was a
brief confabulation between the two guards, which
ended by the one who had first come taking his seat
in her carriage, while the other blew his whistle and
the train started off again and flew at great speed the
remaining miles to Folkestone.
“Now I’ll take the name and address, if you
please, ma’am,” he said politely. “Daphny, yes, thank
you; Daphny without a hef, all right, thank you.”
He wrote it all down laboriously while the hatless
little lady sat opposite, indignant, excited, ready to he
voluble the moment she could think what was best to
say, and above all fearful that her holiday would he
delayed, if not prevented altogether.
Presently the guard looked up at her and put his
note-book away in an inner pocket. It was just after
he had entered the number of the carriage.
“You see, ma’am,” he explained with sudden
suavity, “this communication cord is only for cases of
real danger, and if I report this, as I should do, it
means a ’eavy fine. You must ’ave just pulled it as a
sort of hexperiment, didn’t you?”
Something in the man’s voice caught her ear
there was a change in it; his manner, too, had altered
somehow. He suddenly seemed to have become
apologetic. She was quick to notice the change,
though she could not understand what caused it. It
began, she fancied, from the moment he entered the
number of the carriage in his notebook.
“It’s the delay to the train I’ve got to explain,” he
continued, as if speaking to himself, “and I can’t put
it all on to the engine-driver——”
“Perhaps we shall make it up and there won’t be
any delay,” ventured Miss Slumbubble, carefully
smoothing her hair and rearranging the stray hair-
pins.
“—and I don’t want to get no one into any kind of
trouble, least of all myself,” he continued, wholly
ignoring the interruption. Then he turned round in
his seat and stared hard at his companion with rather
a worried, puzzled expression of countenance and a
shrug of the shoulders that was distinctly apologetic.
Plainly, she thought, he was preparing the way for a
compromise—for a tip!
The train was slackening speed; already it was in
the cutting where it reverses and is pushed back-
wards on to the pier. Miss Slumbubble was desperate.
She had never tipped a man before in her life except
for obvious and recognised services, and this seemed
to her like compounding a felony, or some such
dreadful thing. Yet so much was at stake: she might
be detained at Folkestone for days before the matter
came into court, to say nothing of a £5 fine, which
meant that her holiday would be utterly stopped. The
blue and white mountains swam into her field of
vision, and she heard the wind in the pine forest.
“Perhaps you would give this to your wife,” she
said timidly, holding out a sovereign.
The guard looked at it and shook his head.
“I ’aven’t got a wife, exackly,” he said; “but it isn’t
money I want. What I want is to ’ush this little matter
up as quietly as possible. I may lose my job over this
—but if you’ll agree to say nothing about it, I think I
can square the driver and t’other guard.”
“I won’t say anything, of course,” stammered the
astonished lady. “But I don’t think I quite understand
—”
“You couldn’t understand either till I tell you,” he
replied, looking greatly relieved; “but the fact is, I
never noticed the carriage till I come to put the num-
ber down, and then I see it’s the very one—the very
same number—”
“What number?”
He stared at her for a moment without speaking.
Then he appeared to take a great decision.
“Well, I’m in your ’ands anyhow, ma’am, and I
may as well tell you the lot, and then we both ’elps
the other out. It’s this way, you see. You ain’t the first
to try and jump out of this carriage—not by a long
ways. It’s been done before by a good number—”
“Gracious!”
“But the first who did it was that German woman,
Binckmann—”
“Binckmann, the woman who was found on the
line last year, and the carriage door open?” cried Miss
Slumbubble, aghast.
“That’s her. This was the carriage she jumped
from, and they tried to say it was murder, but
couldn’t find any one who could have done it, and
then they said she must have been crazy. And since
then this carriage was said to be ’aunted, because so
many other people tried to do the same thing and
throw theirselves out too, till the company changed
the number—”
“To this number?” cried the excited spinster,
pointing to the figures on the door.
“That’s it, ma’am. And if you look you’ll see this
number don’t follow on with the others. Even then
the thing didn’t stop, and we got orders to let no one
in. That’s where I made my mistake. I left the door
unlocked, and they put you in. If this gets in the
papers I’ll be dismissed for sure. The company’s awful
strict about that.”
“I’m terrified!” exclaimed Miss Slumbubble, “for
that’s exactly what I felt—”
“That you’d got to jump out, you mean?” asked
the guard.
“Yes. The terror of being shut in.”
“That’s what the doctors said Binckmann had—
the fear of being shut up in a tight place. They gave it
some long name, but that’s what it was: she couldn’t
abide being closed in. Now, here we are at the pier,
ma’am, and, if you’ll allow me, I’ll help you to carry
your little bits of luggage.”
“Oh, thank you, guard, thank you,” she said
faintly, taking his proffered hand and getting out
with infinite relief on to the platform.
“Tchivalry ain’t dead yet, Miss,” he replied gal-
lantly, as he loaded himself up within her packages
and led the way down to the steamer.
Ten minutes later the deep notes of the syren
echoed across the pier, and the paddles began to
churn the green sea. And Miss Daphne Slumbubble,
hatless but undismayed, went abroad to flutter the
remnants of her faded youth before the indifferent
foreigners in the cheap pension among the Alps.
