<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Old Clothes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="old-clothes" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Old Clothes</h2>
			<section id="old-clothes-chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>

            <p>
                Imaginative children with their odd questionings
                of life and their delicate nervous systems must be
                often a source of greater anxiety than delight to their
                parents, and Aileen, the child of my widowed cousin,
                impressed me from the beginning as being a strangely
                vivid specimen of her class. Moreover, the way she
                took to me from the first placed quasi-avuncular
                responsibilities upon my shoulders (in her mother’s
                eyes), that I had no right, even as I had no inclination,
                to shirk. Indeed, I loved the queer, wayward, mysteri-
                ous little being. Only it was not always easy to advise;
                and her somewhat marked peculiarities certainly
                called for advice of a skilled and special order.
                It was not merely that her make-believe was
                unusually sincere and haunting, and that she would
                talk by the hour with invisible playmates (touching
                them, putting up her lips to be kissed, opening doors
                for them to pass in and out, and setting chairs, foot-
                stools and even flowers for them), for many children
                in my experience have done as much and done it with
                a vast sincerity; but that she also accepted what they
                told her with so steady a degree of conviction that
                their words influenced her life and, accordingly, her
                health.
                They told her stories, apparently, in which she
                herself played a central part, stories, moreover, that
                were neither comforting nor wise. She would sit in a
                corner of the room, as both her mother and myself
                can vouch, face to face with some make–believe Occu-
                pant of the chair so carefully arranged; the footstool
                had been placed with precision, and sometimes she
                would move it a little this way or that; the table
                whereon rested the invisible elbows was beside her
                with a jar of flowers that changed according to the
                particular visitor. And there she would wait motion-
                less, perhaps an hour at a time, staring up into the
                viewless features of the person who was talking with
                her—who was telling her a story in which she played
                an exceedingly poignant part. Her face altered with
                the run of emotions, her eyes grew large and moist,
                and sometimes frightened; rarely she laughed, and
                rarely asked a whispered question, but more often sat
                there, tense and eager, uncannily absorbed in the
                inaudible tale falling from invisible lips—the tale of
                her own adventures.
                But it was the terror inspired by these singular
                recitals that affected her delicate health as early as the
                age of eight, and when, owing to her mother’s well-
                meant but ill–advised ridicule, she indulged them
                with more secrecy, the effect upon her nerves and
                character became so acute that I was summoned
                down upon a special advisory visit I scarcely appreci-
                ated.
                “Now, George, what do you think I had better do?
                Dr. Hale insists upon more exercise and more com-
                panionship, sea air and all the rest of it, but none of
                these things seem to do any good.”
                “Have you taken her into your confidence, or
                rather has she taken you into hers?” I ventured mildly.
                The question seemed to give offence a little.
                “Of course,” was the emphatic answer. “The child
                has no secrets from her mother. She is perfectly
                devoted to me.”
                “But you have tried to laugh her out of it, haven’t
                you now?”
                “Yes. But with such success that she holds these
                conversations far less than she used to—”
                “Or more secretly?” was my comment, that was
                met with a superior shrug of the shoulders.
                Then, after a further pause, in which my cousins
                distress and my own affectionate interest in the whim-
                sical imagination of my little niece combined to move
                me, I tried again—“Make-believe,” I observed, “is
                always a bit puzzling to us older folk, because, though
                we indulge in it all our lives. We no longer believe in
                it; whereas children like Aileen—”
                She interrupted me quickly—
                “You know what I feel anxious about,” she said,
                lowering her voice. “I think there may be cause for ser-
                ious alarm.” Then she added frankly, looking up with
                grave eyes into my face, “George, I want your help—
                your best help, please. You’ve always been a true
                friend.”
                I gave it to her in calculated words.
                “Theresa,” I said with grave emphasis, “there is no
                trace of insanity on either side of the family, and my
                own opinion is that Aileen is perfectly well-balanced
                in spite of this too highly developed imagination. But,
                above all things, you must not drive it inwards by
                making fun of it. Lead it out. Educate it. Guide it by
                intelligent sympathy. Get her to tell you all about it,
                and so on. I think Aileen wants careful observing, per-
                haps—but nothing more.”
                For some minutes she watched my face in silence,
                her eyes intent, her features slightly twitching. I knew
                at once from her manner what she was driving at. She
                approached the subject with awkwardness and cir-
                cumlocution, for it was something she dreaded, not
                feeling sure whether it was of heaven or of hell.
                “You are very wonderful, George,” she said at
                length, “and you have theories about almost every
                thing—”
                “Speculations,” I admitted.
                “And your hypnotic power is helpful, you know.
                Now—if—if you thought it safe, and that Providence
                would not be offended—”
                “Theresa,” I stopped her firmly before she had
                committed herself to the point where she would feel
                hurt by a refusal, “let me say at once that I do not con-
                sider a child a fit subject for hypnotic experiment, and
                I feel quite sure that an intelligent person like yourself
                will agree with me that it’s unpermissible.”
                “I was only thinking of a little ‘suggestion,’” she
                murmured.
                “Which would come far better from the mother.”
                “If the mother had not already lost her power by
                using ridicule,” she confessed meekly.
                “Yes, you never should have laughed. Why did
                you, I wonder?”
                An expression came into her eyes that I knew to be
                invariably with hysterical temperaments the precursor
                of tears. She looked round to make sure no one was
                listening.
                “George,” she whispered, and into the dusk of that
                September evening passed some shadow between us
                that left behind an atmosphere of sudden and inex-
                plicable chill, “George, I wish—I wish it was quite
                clear to me that it really is all make-believe, I mean—”
                “What do you mean?” I said, with a severity that
                was assumed to hide my own uneasiness. But the tears
                came the same instant in a flood that made any intel-
                ligent explanation out of the question.
                The terror of the mother for her own blood burst
                forth.
                “I’m frightened—horribly frightened,” she said
                between the sobs.
                “I’ll go up and see the child myself,” I said comfort-
                ingly at length when the storm had subsided. “I’ll run
                up to the nursery. You mustn’t be alarmed. Aileen’s all
                right. I think I can help you in the matter a good deal.”

            </p>


			</section>
			<section id="old-clothes-chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>


                <p>
                    In the nursery as usual Aileen was alone. I found
                    her sitting by the open window, an empty chair oppos-
                    ite to her. She was staring at it—into it, but it is not
                    easy to describe the certainty she managed to convey
                    that there was some one sitting in that chair, talking
                    with her. It was her manner that did it. She rose
                    quickly, with a start as I came in, and made a half ges-
                    ture in the direction of the empty chair as though to
                    shake hands, then corrected her self quickly, and gave
                    a friendly little nod of farewell or dismissal—then
                    turned towards me. Incredible as it must sound, that
                    chair looked at once slightly other wise. It was empty.
                    “Aileen, what in the world are you up to?”
                    “You know, uncle,” she replied, without hesitation.
                    “Oh, rather! I know!” I said, trying to get into her
                    mood so as later to get her out of it, “because I do the
                    same thing with the people in my own stories. I talk to
                    them too—”
                    She came up to my side, as though it were a matter
                    of life and death.
                    “But do they answer?”
                    I realized the overwhelming sincerity, even the
                    seriousness, of the question to her mind. The shadow
                    evoked down-stairs by my cousin had followed me up
                    here. It touched me on the shoulder.
                    “Unless they answer,” I told her, “they are not
                    really alive, and the story hangs fire when people read
                    it.”
                    She watched me very closely a moment as we
                    leaned out of the open window where the rich per-
                    fume of the Portuguese laurels came up from the
                    lawns below. The proximity of the child brought a dis-
                    tinct atmosphere of its own, an atmosphere charged
                    with suggestions, almost with faint pictures, as of
                    things I had once known. I had often felt this before,
                    and did not altogether welcome it, for the pictures
                    seemed framed in some emotional setting that in vari-
                    ably escaped my analysis. I understood in a vague way
                    what it was about the child that made her mother
                    afraid. There flashed across me a fugitive sensation,
                    utterly elusive yet painfully real, that she knew
                    moments of suffering by rights she ought not to have
                    known. Bizarre and unreasonable as the conception
                    was, it was convincing. And it touched a profound
                    sympathy in me.
                    Aileen undoubtedly was aware of this sympathy.
                    “It’s Philip that talks to me most of the time,” she
                    volunteered, “and he’s always, always explaining—but
                    never quite finishes.”
                    “Explaining what, dear little Child of the Moon?” I
                    urged gently, giving her a name she used to love when
                    she was smaller.
                    “Why he couldn’t come in time to save me, of
                    course,” she said. “You see, they cut off both his
                    hands.”
                    I shall never forget the sensation these words of a
                    child’s mental adventure caused me, nor the kind of
                    bitter reality they forced into me that they were true,
                    and not merely a detail of some attempted rescue of a
                    “Princess in a Tower.” A vivid rush of thought seemed
                    to focus my consciousness upon my own two wrists, as
                    though I felt the pain of the operation she mentioned,
                    and with a swift instinct that slipped into action
                    before I could control it, I had hidden both hands
                    from her sight in my coat pockets.
                    “And what else does ‘Philip’ tell you?” I asked
                    gently.
                    Her face flushed. Tears came into her eyes, then
                    fled away again lest they should fall from their softly-
                    coloured nests.
                    “That he loved me so awfully,” she replied; “and
                    that he loved me to the very end, and that all his life
                    after I was gone, and after they cut his hands off, he
                    did nothing but pray for me—from the end of the
                    world where he went to hide—”
                    I shook myself free with an effort from the envelop-
                    ing atmosphere of tragedy, realizing that her imagina-
                    tion must be driven along brighter channels and that
                    my duty must precede my interest.
                    “But you must get Philip to tell you all his funny
                    and jolly adventures, too,” I said, “the ones he had, you
                    know, when his hands grew again—”
                    The expression that came into her face literally
                    froze my blood.
                    “That’s only making-up stories,” she said icily.
                    “They never did grow again. There were no happy or
                    funny adventures.”
                    I cast about in my mind for an inspiration how to
                    help her mind into more wholesome ways of inven-
                    tion. I realized more than ever before the profundity
                    of my affection for this strange, fatherless child, and
                    how I would give my whole soul if I could help her
                    and teach her joy. It was a real love that swept me,
                    rooted in things deeper than I realized.
                    But, before the right word was given me to speak, I
                    felt her nestle up against my side, and heard her utter
                    the very phrase that for some time I had been dread-
                    ing in the secret places of my soul she would utter. The
                    sentence seemed to shake me within. I knew a hur-
                    ried, passing moment of unspeakable pain that is
                    utterly beyond me to reason about.
                    “You know,” was what she said, “because it’s you
                    who are Philip!”
                    And the way she said it—so quietly, the words
                    touched somehow with a gentle though compassion
                    ate scorn, yet made golden by a burning love that
                    filled her little person to the brim—robbed me
                    momentarily of all power of speech. I could only bend
                    down and put my arm about her and kiss her head
                    that came up barely to the level of my chin. I swear I
                    loved that child as I never loved any other human
                    being.
                    “Then Philip is going to teach you all sorts of jolly
                    adventures with his new hands,” I remember saying,
                    with blundering good intention, “because he’s no
                    longer sad, and is full of fun, and loves you twice as
                    much as ever!”
                    And I caught her up and carried her down the long
                    stairs of the house out into the garden, where we
                    joined the dogs and romped together until the face of
                    the motherly Kempster at an upper window shouted
                    down something stupid about bed-time, supper, or
                    the rest of it, and Aileen, flushed yet with brighter
                    eyes, ran into the house and, turning at the door,
                    showed me her odd little face wreathed in smiles and
                    laughter.
                    For a long time I paced to and fro with a cigar
                    between the box hedges of the old-time garden,
                    thinking of the child and her queer imaginings, and of
                    the profoundly moving and disquieting sensations she
                    stirred in me at the same time. Her face flitted by my
                    side through the shadows. She was not pretty, prop-
                    erly speaking, but her appearance possessed an ori-
                    ginal charm that appealed to me strongly. Her head
                    was big and in some way old-fashioned; her eyes, dark
                    but not large, were placed close together, and she had
                    a wide mouth that was certainly not beautiful. But the
                    look of distressed and yearning passion that some-
                    times swept over these features, not otherwise prepos-
                    sessing, changed her look into sudden beauty, a
                    beauty of the soul, a soul that knew suffering and was
                    acquainted with grief. This, at least, is the way my own
                    mind saw the child, and therefore the only way I can
                    hope to make others see her. Were I a painter I might
                    put her upon canvas in some imaginary portrait and
                    call it, perhaps, “Reincarnation”—for I have never
                    seen any thing in child-life that impressed me so
                    vividly with that odd idea of an old soul come back to
                    the world in a new young body—a new Suit of
                    Clothes.
                    But when I talked with my cousin after dinner, and
                    consoled her with the assurance that Aileen was gifted
                    with an unusually vivid imagination which time and
                    ourselves must train to some more practical end—
                    while I said all this, and more besides, two sentences
                    the child had made use of kept ringing in my head.
                    One—when she told me with merciless perception
                    that I was only “making-up” stories; and the other,
                    when she had informed me with that quiet rush of
                    certainty and conviction that “Philip” was—myself.
                </p>
                
                                

			</section>
			<section id="old-clothes-chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>


                <p>
                    A big-game expedition of some months put an end
                    temporarily to my avuncular responsibilities; at least
                    so far as action was concerned, for there were certain
                    memories that held curiously vivid among all the
                    absorbing turmoil of our camp life. Often, lying awake
                    in my tent at night, or even following the tracks of our
                    prey through the jungle, these pictures would jump
                    out upon me and claim attention. Aileen’s little face of
                    suffering would come between me and the sight of my
                    rifle; or her assurance that I was the “Philip” of her
                    imagination would attack me with an accent of reality
                    that seemed queer enough until I analyzed it away.
                    And more than once I found myself thinking of her
                    dark and serious countenance when she told how
                    “Philip” had loved her to the end, and would have
                    saved her if they had not cut off his hands. My own
                    Imagination, it seemed, was weaving the details of her
                    child’ s invention into a story, for I never could think
                    of this latter detail without positively experiencing a
                    sensation of smarting pain in my wrists...!
                    When I returned to England in the spring they
                    had moved, I found, into a house by the sea, a
                    tumbled-down old rookery of a building my cousin s
                    father had rarely occupied during his lifetime, nor she
                    been able to let since it had passed into her posses-
                    sion. An urgent letter summoned me thither, and I
                    travelled down the very day after my arrival to the
                    bleak Norfolk coast with a sense of foreboding in my
                    heart that increased almost to a presentiment when
                    the cab entered the long drive and I recognized the
                    grey and gloomy walls of the old mansion. The sea air
                    swept the gardens with its salt wash, and the moan of
                    the surf was audible even up to the windows.
                    “I wonder what possessed her to come here?” was
                    the first thought in my mind. “Surely the last place in
                    the world to bring a morbid or too-sensitive child to!”
                    My further dread that something had happened to the
                    little child I loved so tenderly was partly dispelled,
                    however, when my cousin met me at the door with
                    open arms and smiling face, though the welcome I
                    soon found, was chiefly due to the relief she gained
                    from my presence. Something had happened to little
                    Aileen, though not the final disaster that I dreaded.
                    She had suffered from nervous attacks of so serious a
                    character during my absence that the doctor had
                    insisted upon sea air, and my cousin, not with the best
                    judgment, had seized upon the idea of making the old
                    house serve the purpose. She had made a wing habit-
                    able for a few weeks; she hoped the entire change of
                    scene would fill the little girl’s mind with new and
                    happier ideas. Instead—the result had been exactly
                    the reverse. The child had wept copiously and hyster-
                    ically the moment she set eyes on the old walls and
                    smelt the odour of the sea.
                    But before we had been talking ten minutes there
                    was a cry and a sound of rushing footsteps, and a
                    scampering figure, with dark, flying hair, had dived
                    headlong into my arms, and Aileen was sobbing—
                    “Oh, you’ve come, you’ve come at last! I am so
                    awfully glad. I thought it would be the same as before,
                    and you’d get caught.” She ran from me next and
                    kissed her mother, laughing with pleasure through
                    her tears, and was gone from the room as quickly as
                    she had come.
                    I caught my cousin’s glance of frightened
                    amazement.
                    “Now isn’t that odd?” she exclaimed in a hushed
                    voice. “Isn’t that odd? Those are the tears of happi-
                    ness,—the first time I’ve seen her smile since we came
                    here last week.”
                    But it rather nettled me, I think. “Why odd?” I
                    asked. “Aileen loves me, it’s delightful to—”
                    “Not that, not that!” she said quickly. “It’s odd, I
                    meant, she should have found you out so soon. She
                    didn’t even know you were back in England, and I’d
                    sent her off to play on the sands with Kempster and
                    the dogs so as to be sure of an opportunity of telling
                    you everything before you saw her.”
                    “You see, she knew perfectly well you were here—
                    the instant you came.”
                    “But there’s nothing in that,” I asserted. “Children
                    know things just as animals do. She scented her
                    favourite uncle from the shore like a dog!”
                    And I laughed in her face.
                    That laugh perhaps was a mistake on my part. Its
                    well-meant cheerfulness was possibly overdone. Even
                    to myself it did not ring quite true
                    
                    “I do believe you are in league with her—against
                    me,” was the remark that greeted it, accompanied by
                    an increase of that expression of fear in the eyes I had
                    divined the moment we met upon the doorstep. Find-
                    ing nothing genuine to say in reply, I kissed the top of
                    her head.
                    In due course, after the tea things had been
                    removed, I learned the exact state of affairs, and even
                    making due allowance for my cousin’s excited exagger-
                    ations, there were things that seemed to me inexplic-
                    able enough on any ground of normal explanation.
                    Slight as the details may seem when set down seri-
                    atim, their cumulative effect upon my own mind
                    touched an impressive and disagreeable climax that I
                    did my best to conceal from outward betrayal. As I sat
                    in the great shadowy room, listening to my cousin’s
                    jerky description of “childish” things, it was borne in
                    upon me that they might well have the profoundest
                    possible significance. I watched her eager, frightened
                    face, lit only by the flickering flames the sharp spring
                    evening made necessary, and thought of the subject of
                    our conversation flitting about the dreary halls and
                    corridors of the huge old building, a little figure of
                    tragedy, laughing, crying and dreaming in a world
                    entirely her own—and there stirred in me an unwel-
                    come recognition of those mutinous and dishevelled
                    forces that lie but thinly screened behind the com-
                    mon-place details of life and that now seemed ready
                    to burst forth and play their mysterious rôle before
                    our very eyes.
                    “Tell me exactly what has happened,” I urged, with
                    decision but sympathy.
                    “There’s so little, when it’s put into words, George;
                    but—well, the thing that first upset me was that she—
                    knew the whole place, though she’s never been here
                    before. She knew every passage and staircase, many of
                    them that I did not know myself; she showed us an
                    underground passage to the sea, that father himself
                    didn’t know; and she actually drew a scrawl of the
                    house as it used to be three hundred years ago when
                    the other wing was standing where the copper
                    beeches grow now. It’s accurate, too.”
                    It seemed impossible to explain to a person of my
                    cousin’s temperament the theories of pre-natal
                    memory and the like, or the possibility of her own
                    knowledge being communicated telepathically to the
                    brain of her own daughter. I said therefore very little,
                    but listened with an uneasiness that grew horribly.
                    “She found her way about the gardens instantly, as
                    if she had played in them all her life; and she keeps
                    drawing figures of people—men and women—in old
                    costumes, the sort of thing our ancestors wore, you
                    know—”
                    “Well, well, well!” I interrupted impatiently; “what
                    can be more natural? She is old enough to have seen
                    pictures she can remember enough to copy—?”
                    “Of course,” she resumed calmly, but with a
                    calmness due to the terror that ate her very soul and
                    swallowed up all minor emotions; “of course, but one
                    of the faces she gets is—a portrait.”
                    She rose suddenly and came closer to me across
                    the big stone hearth, lowering her voice to a whisper,
                    “George,” she whispered, “it’s the very image of that
                    awful—de Lorne!”
                    The announcement, I admit, gave me a thrill, for
                    that particular ancestor on my father’s side had largely
                    influenced my boyhood imagination by the accounts
                    of his cruelty wickedness in days gone by. But I think
                    now the shiver that ran down my back was due to the
                    thought of my little Aileen practising her memory and
                    pencil upon so vile an object. That, and my cousin’s
                    pale visage of alarm, combined to shake me. I said,
                    however, what seemed wise and reasonable at the
                    moment.
                    “You’ll be claiming next, Theresa, that the house is
                    haunted,” I suggested.
                    She shrugged her shoulders with an indifference
                    that was very eloquent of the strength of this other
                    more substantial terror.
                    “That would be so easy to deal with,” she said,
                    without even looking up. “A ghost stays in one place.
                    Aileen could hardly take it about with her.”
                    I think we both enjoyed the pause that followed. It
                    gave me time to collect my forces for what I knew was
                    coming. It gave her time to get her further facts into
                    some pretence of coherence.
                    “I told you about the belt?” she asked at length,
                    weakly, and as though unutterable things she longed
                    to dis own forced the question to her unwilling lips.
                    The sentence shot into me like the thrust of a
                    naked sword.... I shook my head.
                    “Well, even a year or two ago she had that strange
                    dislike of wearing a belt with her frocks. ‘We thought
                    it was a whim, and did not humour her. Belts are
                    necessary, you know, George,” she tried to smile feebly.
                    “But now it has come to such a point that I’ve had to
                    give in.”
                    “She dislikes a belt round her waist, you mean?” I
                    asked, fighting a sudden inexplicable spasm in my he
                    art.
                    “It makes her scream. The moment anything
                    encloses her waist she sets up such a hubbub, and
                    struggles so, and hides away, and I’ve been obliged to
                    yield.”
                    “But really, Theresa—!”
                    “She declares it fastens her in, and she will never
                    get free again, and all kinds of other things. Oh, her
                    fear is dreadful, poor child. Her face gets that sort of
                    awful grey, don’t you know? Even Kempster, who if
                    anything is too firm, had to give in.”
                    “And what else, pray?” I disliked hearing these
                    details intensely. It made me ache with a kind of anger
                    that I could not at once relieve the child’s pain.
                    “The way she spoke to me after Dr. Hale had left—
                    you know how awfully kind and gentle he is, and how
                    Aileen likes him and even plays with him and sits on
                    his knee? Well, he was talking about her diet, regulat-
                    ing it and so forth, teasing her that she mustn’t eat
                    this and that, and the rest of it, when she turned that
                    horrid grey again and jumped oft his knee with her
                    scream—that thin wailing scream she has that goes
                    through me like a knife, George—and flew to the
                    nursery and locked herself in with—what do you
                    think?—with all the bread, apples, cold meat and
                    other eatables she could find!”
                    “Eatables!” I exclaimed, aware of another spasm of
                    vivid pain.
                    “When I coaxed her out, hours later, she was
                    trembling like a leaf and fell into my arms utterly
                    exhausted, and all I could get her to tell me was this—
                    which she repeated again and again with a sort of
                    beseeching, appealing tone that made my heart bleed
                    —”
                    She hesitated an instant.
                    “Tell me at once.”
                    “‘I shall starve again, I shall starve again,’ were the
                    words she used. She kept repeating it over and over
                    between her sobs. ‘I shall be without anything to eat. I
                    shall starve!’ And, would you believe it, while she hid
                    in that nursery cupboard she had crammed so much
                    cake and stuff into her little self that she was violently
                    sick for a couple of days. Moreover, she now hates the
                    sight of Dr. Hale so much, poor man, that it’s useless
                    for him to see her. It does more harm than good.”
                    I had risen and begun to walk up and down the
                    hall while she told me this. I said very little. In my
                    mind strange thoughts tore and raced, standing erect
                    before me out of unbelievably immense depths of
                    shadow. There was nothing very pregnant I found to
                    say, however, for theories and speculations are of
                    small avail as practical help—unless two minds see
                    eye to eye in them.
                    “And the rest?” I asked gently, coming behind the
                    chair and resting both hands upon her shoulders. She
                    got up at once and faced me. I was afraid to show too
                    much sympathy lest the tears should come.
                    “Oh, George,” she exclaimed, “I am relieved you
                    have come. You are really strong and comforting. To
                    feel your great hands on my shoulders gives me cour-
                    age. But, you know, truly and honestly I am frightened
                    out of my very wits by the child—”
                    “You won’t stay here, of course?”
                    “We leave at the end of this week,” she replied.
                    “You will not desert me till then, I know. And Aileen
                    will be all right as long as you are here, for you have
                    the most extraordinary effect on her for good.”
                    “Bless her little suffering imagination,” I said. “You
                    can count on me. I’ll send to town tonight for my
                    things.”
                    And then she told me about the room. It was
                    simple enough, but it conveyed a more horrible cer-
                    tainty of something true than all the other details put
                    together. For there was a room on the ground floor,
                    intended to be used on wet days when the nursery was
                    too far for muddy boots—and into this room Aileen
                    could not go. Why? No one could tell. The facts were
                    that the first moment the child ran in, her mother
                    close behind, she stopped, swayed, and nearly fell.
                    Then, with shrieks that were even heard outside by
                    the gardeners sweeping the gravel path, she flung her-
                    self headlong against the wall, against a particular
                    corner of it that is to say, and beat it with her little
                    fists until the skin broke and left stains upon the
                    paper. It all happened in less than a minute. The
                    words she cried so frantically her mother was too
                    shocked and flabbergasted to remember, or even to
                    hear properly. Aileen nearly upset her in her
                    bewildered efforts next to find the door and escape.
                    And the first thing she did when escape was accom-
                    plished, was to drop in a dead faint upon the stone
                    floor of the passage outside.
                    “Now, is that all make-believe?” whispered
                    Theresa, unable to keep the shudder from her lips. “Is
                    that all merely part of a story she has make up and
                    plays a part in?”
                    We looked one another straight in the eyes for a
                    space of some seconds. The dread in the mother’s
                    heart leaped out to swell a terror in my own—a terror
                    of another kind, but greater.
                    “It is too late to-night,” I said at length, “for it
                    would only excite her unnecessarily; but to-morrow I
                    will talk with Aileen. And—if it seems wise—I might
                    —I might be able to help in other ways too,” I added
                    So I did talk to her—next day
                </p>
                
                                

			</section>
			<section id="old-clothes-chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>


                <p>
                    I always had her confidence, this little dark-eyed
                    maid, and there was an intimacy between us that
                    made play and talk very delightful. Yet as a rule,
                    without giving myself a satisfactory reason, I pre-
                    ferred talking with her in the sunlight. She was not
                    eerie, bless her little heart of queerness and mystery,
                    but she had a way of suggesting other ways of life and
                    existence shouldering about us that made me look
                    round in the dark and wonder what the shadows con-
                    cealed or what waited round the next corner.
                    We were on the lawn, where the bushy yews drop
                    thick shade, the soft air making tea possible out of
                    doors, my cousin out driving to distant calls; and
                    Aileen had invited herself and was messing about
                    with my manuscripts in a way that vexed me, for I had
                    been reading my fairy tales to her and she kept asking
                    me questions that shamed my limited powers. I
                    remember, too, that I was glad the collie ran to and fro
                    past us, scampering and barking after the swallows on
                    the lawn.
                    “Only some of your stories are true, aren’t they?”
                    she asked abruptly.
                    “How do you know that, young critic?” I had been
                    waiting for an opening supplied by herself. Anything
                    forced on my part she would have suspected.
                    “Oh, I can tell.”
                    Then she came up and whispered without any hint
                    of invitation on my part, “Uncle, it is true, isn’t it, that
                    I’ve been in other places with you? And isn’t it only the
                    things we did there that make the true stories?”
                    The opening was delivered all perfect and com-
                    plete into my hands. I cannot conceive how it was I
                    availed myself of it so queerly—I mean, how it was
                    that the words and the name slipped out of their own
                    accord as though I was saying something in a dream.
                    “Of course, my little Lady Aileen, because in ima-
                    gination, you see, we—”
                    But before I had time to finish the sentence with
                    which I hoped to coax out the true inwardness of her
                    own distress, she was upon me in a heap.
                    “Oh,” she cried, with a sudden passionate out-
                    burst, “then you do know my name? You know all the
                    story—our story!”
                    She was very excited, face flushed, eyes dancing,
                    all the emotions of a life charged to the brim with
                    experience playing through her little person.
                    “Of course, Miss Inventor, I know your name,” I
                    said quickly, puzzled, and with a sudden dismay that
                    was hideous, clutching at my throat.
                    “And all that we did in this place?” she went on,
                    pointing with increased excitement to the thick, ivy-
                    grown walls of the old house.
                    My own emotion grew extraordinarily, a swift,
                    rushing uneasiness upsetting all my calculations. For
                    it suddenly came back to me that in calling her “Lady
                    Aileen” I had not pronounced the name quite as
                    usual. My tongue had played a trick with the conson-
                    ants and vowels, though at the moment of utterance I
                    had somehow failed to notice the change. “Aileen” and
                    “Helen” are almost interchangeable sounds....! And it
                    was “Lady Helen” that I had actually said.
                    The discovery took my breath away for an instant
                    —and the way she had leaped upon the name to claim
                    it.
                    “No one else, you see, knows me as ‘Lady Helen,’”
                    she continued whispering, “because that’s only in our
                    story, isn’t it? And now I’m just Aileen Langton. But as
                    long as you know, it’s all right. Oh, I am so awf’ly glad
                    you knew, most awf ’ly, awf’ly glad.”
                    I was momentarily at a loss for words. Keenly
                    desirous to guide the child’s “pain-stories” into wiser
                    channels, and thus help her to relief, I hesitated a
                    moment for the right clue. I murmured something
                    soothing about “our story,” while in my mind I
                    searched vigorously for the best way of leading her on
                    to explain all her terror of the belt, the fear of starva-
                    tion, the room that made her scream, and all the rest.
                    All that I was most anxious to get out of her little tor-
                    tured mind and then replace it by some brighter
                    dream.
                    But the insidious experience had shaken my con-
                    fidence a little, and these explicable emotions des-
                    troyed my elder wisdom. The little Inventor had
                    caught me away into the reality of her own “story”
                    with a sense of conviction that was even beyond
                    witchery. And the next sentence she almost instantly
                    let loose upon me completed my discomfiture—
                    “With you,” she said, still half whispering, “with
                    you I could even go into the room. I never could—
                    alone—!”
                    The spring wind whispering in the yews behind us
                    brought in that moment something upon me from
                    vanished childhood days that made me tremble. Some
                    wave of lost passion—lost because I guessed not its
                    origin or nature—surged through the depths of me,
                    sending faint messages to the surface of my con-
                    sciousness. Aileen, little mischief-maker, changed
                    before my very eyes as she stood there close—changed
                    into a tall sad figure that beckoned to me across seas
                    of time and distance, with the haze of ages in her eyes
                    and gestures, I was obliged to focus my gaze upon her
                    with a deliberate effort to see her again as the tumble-
                    haired girl I was accustomed to. . . .
                    Then, sitting in the creaky garden chair, I drew her
                    down upon my knee, determined to win the whole
                    story from her mind. My back was to the house; she
                    was perched at an angle, however, that enabled her to
                    command the doors and windows. I mention this
                    because, scarcely had I begun my attack, when I saw
                    that her attention wandered, and that she seemed
                    curiously uneasy. Once or twice, as she shifted her
                    position to get a view of something that was going on
                    over my shoulder, I was aware that a slight shiver
                    passed from her small person down to my knees. She
                    seemed to be expecting something—with dread.
                    “We’ll make a special expedition, armed to the
                    teeth,” I said, with a laugh, referring to her singular
                    words about the room. “We’ll send Pat in first to bark
                    at the cobwebs, and we’ll take lots of provisions and—
                    and water in case of a siege—and a file—”
                    I cannot pretend to understand why I chose those
                    precise words—or why it was as though other
                    thoughts than those I had intended rose up, clamour-
                    ing for expression. It seemed all I could manage not to
                    say a lot of other things about the room that could
                    only have frightened instead of relieving her.
                    “Will you talk into the wall too?” she asked, turning
                    her eyes down suddenly upon me with a little rush
                    and flame of passion. And though I had not the
                    faintest conception what she meant, the question sent
                    an agony of yearning pain through me. “Talking into
                    the wall,” I instantly grasped, referred to the core of
                    her trouble, the very central idea that frightened her
                    and provided the suffering and terror of all her ima-
                    ginings.
                    But I had no time to follow up the clue thus mys-
                    teriously offered to me, for almost at the same
                    moment her eyes fixed themselves upon something
                    behind me with an expression of tense horror, as
                    though she saw the approach of a danger that might—
                    kill.
                    “Oh, oh!” she cried under her breath, “he’s com-
                    ing! He’s coming to take me! Uncle George—Philip
                    —!”
                    The same impulse operated upon us simultan-
                    eously, it seems, for I sprang up with my fists clenched
                    at the very instant she shot off my knee and stood
                    with all her muscles rigid as though to resist attack.
                    She was shaking dreadfully. Her face went the colour
                    of linen.
                    “Who’s coming——?” I began sharply, then
                    stopped as I saw the figure of a man moving towards
                    us from the house. It was the butler—the new butler
                    who had arrived only that very afternoon. It is
                    impossible to say what there was in his swift and silent
                    approach that was—abominable. The man was upon
                    us, it seemed, almost as soon as I caught sight of him,
                    and the same moment Aileen, with a bursting cry,
                    looking wildly about her for a place to hide in,
                    plunged headlong into my arms and buried her face
                    in my coat.
                    Horribly perplexed, yet mortified that the servant
                    should see my little friend in such a state, I did my
                    best to pretend that it was all part of some mad game
                    or other, and catching her up in my arms, I ran, calling
                    the collie to follow with, “Come on, Pat! She’s our pris-
                    oner!”—and only set her down when we were under
                    the limes at the far end of the lawn. She was all white
                    and ghostly from her terror, still looking frantically
                    about her, trembling in such a way that I thought any
                    minute she must collapse in a dead faint. She clung to
                    me with very tight fingers. How I hated that man.
                    Judging by the sudden violence of my loathing he
                    might have been some monster who wanted to torture
                    her.
                    “Let’s go away, oh, much farther, ever so far away!”
                    she whispered, and I took her by the hand, comforting
                    her as best I could with words, while realizing that the
                    thing she wanted was my big arm about her to pro-
                    tect. My heart ached, oh, so fiercely, for her, but the
                    odd thing about it was that I could not find anything
                    of real comfort to say that I felt would be true. If I
                    “made up” soothing rubbish, it would not deceive
                    either of us and would only shake her confidence in
                    me, so that I should lose any power I had to help. Had
                    a tiger come upon her out of the wood I might as well
                    have assured her it would not bite!
                    I did stammer something, however—
                    “It’s only the new butler. He startled me, too; he
                    came so softly, didn’t he?” Oh! How eagerly I searched
                    for a word that might make the thing seem as ordinary
                    as possible—yet how vainly.
                    “But you know who he is—really!” she said in a
                    crying whisper, running down the path and dragging
                    me after her; “and if he gets me again ... oh! Oh!” and
                    she shrieked aloud in the anguish of her fear.
                    That fear chased both of us down the winding
                    path between the bushes.
                    “Aileen, darling,” I cried, surrounding her with
                    both arms and holding her very tight, “you need not
                    be afraid. I’ll always save you. I’ll always be with you,
                    dear child.”
                    “Keep me in your big arms, always, always, won’t
                    you, Uncle—Philip?” She mixed both names. The
                    choking stress of her voice wrung me dreadfully.
                    “Always, always, like in our story,” she pleaded, hiding
                    her little face again in my coat.
                    I really was at a complete loss to know what best to
                    do; I hardly dared to bring her back to the house; the
                    sight of the man, I felt, might be fatal to her already
                    too delicately balanced reason, for I dreaded a fit or
                    seizure if she chanced to run across him when I was
                    not with her. My mind was easily made up on one
                    point, however.
                    “I’ll send him away at once, Aileen,” I told her.
                    “When you wake up to-morrow he’ll be gone. Of
                    course mother won’t keep him.”
                    This assurance seemed to bring her some measure
                    of comfort, and at last, without having dared to win
                    the whole story from her as I had first hoped, I got her
                    back to the house by covert ways, and saw her myself
                    up-stairs to her own quarters. Also I took it upon
                    myself to give the necessary orders. She must set no
                    eye upon the man. Only, why was it that in my heart
                    of hearts I longed for him to do something outrageous
                    that should make it possible for me to break his very
                    life at its source and kill him...?
                    But my cousin, alarmed to the point of taking
                    even frantic measures , finally had a sound suggestion
                    to offer, namely that I should take the afflicted little
                    child away with me the very next day, run down to
                    Harwich and carry her off for a week of absolute
                    change across the North Sea. And I, meanwhile, had
                    reached the point where I had persuaded myself that
                    the experiment I had hitherto felt unable to consent
                    to had now become a permissible, even a necessary
                    one. Hypnotism should win the story from that
                    haunted mind without her being aware of it, and
                    provided I could drive her deep enough into the
                    trance state, I could then further wipe the memory
                    from her outer consciousness so completely that she
                    might know at last some happiness of childhood.
                </p>
                
                

			</section>
			<section id="old-clothes-chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>

                <p>

                    t was after ten o’clock, and I was still sitting in the
                    big hail before the fire of logs, talking with lowered
                    voice. My cousin sat opposite to me in a deep arm-
                    chair. We had discussed the matter pretty fully, and
                    the deep uneasiness we felt clothed not alone our
                    minds but the very building with gloom. The fact that,
                    instinctively, neither of us referred to the possible
                    assistance of doctors is eloquent, I think, of the emo-
                    tion that troubled us both so profoundly, the emotion,
                    I mean, that sprang from the vivid sense of the reality
                    of it all. No child’s make-believe merely could have
                    thus caught us away, or spread a net that entangled
                    our minds to such a point of confusion and dismay. It
                    was perfectly comprehensible to me now that my
                    cousin should have cried in very helplessness before
                    the convincing effects of the little girl’s calamitous dis-
                    tress. Aileen was living through a Reality, not an
                    Invention. This was the fact that haunted the shadowy
                    halls and corridors behind us. Already I hated the very
                    building. It seemed charged to the roof with the
                    memories of melancholy and ancient pain that swept
                    my heart with shivering, cold winds.
                    Purposely, however, I affected some degree of
                    cheerfulness, and concealed from my cousin any men-
                    tion of the attacks that certain emotions and alarms
                    had made upon myself: I said nothing of my replacing
                    “Lady Aileen” with “Lady Helen,” nothing of my
                    passing for “Philip,” or of my sudden dashes of quasi-
                    memory arising from the child’s inclusion of myself in
                    her “story,” and my own singular acceptance of the
                    rôle. I did not consider it wise to mention all that the
                    sight of the new servant with his sinister dark face and
                    his method of stealthy approach had awakened in my
                    thoughts. None the less these things started con-
                    stantly to the surface of my mind and doubtless
                    betrayed themselves somewhere in my “atmosphere,”
                    sufficiently at least for a woman’s intuition to divine
                    them. I spoke passingly of the “room,” and of Aileen’s
                    singular aversion for it, and of her remark about “talk-
                    ing to the wall.” Yet strange thoughts pricked their way
                    horribly into both our minds. In the hall the stuffed
                    heads of deer and fox and badger stared upon us like
                    masks of things still alive beneath their fur and dead
                    skin.
                    “But what disturbs me more than all the rest of
                    her delusions put together,” said my cousin, peering at
                    me with eyes that made no pretence of hiding dark
                    things, “is her extraordinary knowledge of this place. I
                    assure you, George, it was the most uncanny thing I’ve
                    ever known when she showed me over and asked
                    questions as if she had actually lived here.” Her voice
                    sank to a whisper, and she looked up startled. It
                    seemed to me for a moment that some one was com-
                    ing near to listen, moving stealthily upon us along the
                    dark approaches to the hall.
                    “I can understand you found it strange,” I began
                    quickly. But she interrupted me at once. Clearly it gave
                    her a certain relief to say the things and get them out
                    of her mind where they hid, breeding new growths of
                    abhorrence.
                    “George,” she cried aloud, “there’s a limit to ima-
                    gination. Aileen knows. That’s the awful thing—.”
                    Something sprang into my throat. My eyes
                    moistened.
                    “The horror of the belt——” she whispered, loath-
                    ing her own words.
                    “Leave that thought alone,” I said with decision.
                    The detail pained me inexpressibly—beyond belief.
                    “I wish I could,” she answered, “but if you had seen
                    the look on her face when she struggled—and the—
                    the frenzy she got into about the food and starving—I
                    mean when Dr. Hale spoke—oh, if you had seen all
                    that, you would understand that I—”
                    She broke off with a start. Some one had entered
                    the hall behind us and was standing in the doorway at
                    the far end. The listener had moved upon us from the
                    dark. Theresa, though her back was turned, had felt
                    the presence and was instantly upon her feet.
                    “You need not sit up, Porter,” she said, in at one
                    that only thinly veiled the fever of apprehension
                    behind, “we will put the lights out,” and the man with-
                    drew like a shadow. She exchanged a quick glance with
                    me. A sensation of darkness that seemed to have come
                    with the servant’s presence was gone. It is wholly bey-
                    ond me to explain why neither myself nor my cousin
                    found anything to say for some minutes. But it was
                    still more a mystery, I think, why the muscles of my
                    two hands should have contracted involuntarily with a
                    force that drove the nails into my palms, and why the
                    violent impulse should have leaped into my blood to
                    fling myself upon the man and strangle the life out of
                    his neck before he could take another breath. I have
                    never before or since experienced this apparently
                    causeless desire to throttle anybody. I hope I never
                    may again.
                    “He hangs about rather,” was all my cousin said
                    presently. “He’s always watching us—” But my own
                    thoughts were horribly busy, and I was marvelling
                    how it was this ugly and sinister creature had ever
                    come to be accepted in the story that Aileen lived, and
                    that I was slowly coming to believe in.
                    It was a relief to me when, towards midnight.
                    Theresa rose to go to bed. We had skirted through the
                    horrors of the child’s possessing misery without ever
                    quite facing it, and as we stood there lighting the
                    candles, our voices whispering, our minds charged
                    with the strain of thoughts neither of us had felt it
                    wise to utter, my cousin started back against the wall
                    and stared up into the darkness above where the stair
                    case climbed the well of the house. She uttered a cry.
                    At first I thought she was going to collapse. I was only
                    just in time to catch the candle.
                    All the emotions of fearfulness she had repressed
                    during our long talk came out in that brief cry, and
                    when I looked up t o discover the cause I saw a small
                    white figure come slowly down the wide staircase and
                    just about to step into the hall. It was Aileen, with
                    bare feet, her dark hair tumbling down over her night-
                    gown, her eyes wide open, an expression in them of
                    anguished expectancy that her tender years could
                    never possibly have known. She was walking steadily,
                    yet somehow not quite as a child walks.
                    “Stop!” I whispered peremptorily to my cousin,
                    putting my hand quickly over her mouth, and holding
                    her back from the first movement of rescue, “don’t
                    wake her. She’s walking in her sleep.”
                    Aileen passed us like a white shadow, scarcely aud-
                    ible, and went straight across the hall. She was utterly
                    unaware of our presence. Avoiding all obstructions of
                    chairs and tables, moving with decision and purpose,
                    the little figure dipped into the shadows at the far end
                    and disappeared from view in the mouth of the cor-
                    ridor that had once—three hundred years ago—led
                    into the wing where now the copper beeches grew
                    upon open lawns. It was clearly a way familiar to her.
                    And the instant I recovered from my surprise and
                    moved after her to act, Theresa found her voice and
                    cried aloud—a voice that broke the midnight silence
                    with shrill discordance—
                    “George, oh, George! She’s going to that awful
                    room...!”
                    “Bring the candle and come after me,” I replied
                    from halfway down the hall, “but do not interrupt
                    unless I call for you,” and was after the child at a pace
                    to which the most singular medley of emotions I have
                    ever known urged me imperiously. A sense of tragic
                    disaster gripped my very vitals. All that I did seemed
                    to rise out of some subconscious region of the mind
                    where the haunting passions of a deeply buried past
                    stirred in their sleep and woke.
                    “Helen!” I cried, “Lady Helen!” I was close upon
                    the gliding figure. Aileen turned and for the first time
                    saw me with eyes that seemed to waver between sleep
                    and waking. They gazed straight at me over the flick-
                    ering candle flame, then hesitated. In similar fashion
                    the gesture of her little hands towards me was arres-
                    ted before it had completed itself. She saw me, knew
                    my presence, yet was uncertain who I was. It was
                    astonishing the way I actually surprised this moment-
                    ary indecision between the two personalities in her—
                    caught the two phases of her consciousness at grips—
                    discerned the Aileen of Today in the act of waking to
                    know me as her “Uncle George,” and that other Aileen
                    of her great dark story, the “Helen” of some far Yester-
                    day, that drew her in this condition of somnambulism
                    to the scene in the past where our two lives were
                    linked in her imagination. For it was quite clear to me
                    that the child was dreaming in her sleep the action of
                    the story she lived through in the vivid moments of
                    her waking terror.
                    But the choice was swift. I just had time to signal
                    Theresa to set the candle upon a shelf and wait, when
                    she came up, stretched her hands out in completion of
                    the original gesture, and fell into my arms with a
                    smothered cry of love and anguish that, coming from
                    those childish lips, I think is the most thrilling human
                    sound I have ever known. She knew and saw me, but
                    not as “Uncle” George of this present life.
                    “Oh, Philip! “she cried, “then you have come after
                    all—”
                    “Of course, dear heart,” I whispered. “Of course I
                    have come. Did I not give my promise that I would?”
                    Her eyes searched my face, and then settled upon
                    my hands that held her little cold wrists so tightly.
                    “But—but,” she stammered in comment, “they are
                    not cut! They have made you whole again! You will
                    save me and get me out, and we—we—”
                    The expressions of her face ran together into a
                    queer confusion of perplexity, and she seemed to tot-
                    ter on her feet. In another instant she would probably
                    have wakened; again she felt the touch of uncertainty
                    and doubt as to my identity. Her hands resisted the
                    pressure of my own; she drew back half a step; into
                    her eyes rose the shallower consciousness of the
                    present. Once awake it would drive out the profoundly
                    strange passion and mystery that haunted the cor-
                    ridors of thought and memory and plunged so
                    obscurely into the inmost recesses of her being. For,
                    once awake, I realized that I should lose her, lose the
                    opportunity of getting the complete story. The chance
                    was unique. I heard my cousin’s footsteps approach-
                    ing behind us down the passage on tiptoe—and I
                    came to an immediate decision.
                    In the state of deep sleep, of course, the trance
                    condition is very close, and many experiments had
                    taught me that the human spirit can be subjected to
                    the influence of hypnotism far more speedily when
                    asleep than when a wake; for if hypnotism means
                    chiefly—as I then held it to mean—the merging of
                    the little ineffectual surface-consciousness with the
                    deep sea of the greater subliminal consciousness
                    below, then the process has already been partially
                    begun in normal slumber and its completion need be
                    no very long or difficult matter. It was Aileen’s very
                    active subconsciousness that “invented” or
                    “remembered” the dark story which haunted her life,
                    her subconscious region too readily within tap. . . . By
                    deepening her sleep state I could learn the whole
                    story.
                    Stopping her mother’s approach with a sign that I
                    intended she should clearly understand, and which
                    accordingly she did understand, I took immediate
                    steps to plunge the spirit of this little sleep-walking
                    child down again into the subconscious region that
                    had driven her thus far, and wherein lay the potential-
                    ities of all her powers, of memory, knowledge and
                    belief. Only the simplest passes were necessary, for
                    she yielded quickly and easily; that first look came
                    back into her eyes; she no longer wavered or hesitated,
                    but drew close against me, with the name of “Philip”
                    upon her lips, and together we moved down the long
                    passage till we reached the door of her horrid room of
                    terror.
                    And there, whether it was that Theresa’s following
                    with the candle disturbed the child—for the subcon-
                    scious tie with the mother is of such unalterable
                    power—or whether anxiety weakened my authority
                    over her fluctuating mental state, I noticed that she
                    again wavered and hesitated, looking up with eyes
                    that saw partly “Uncle George,” partly the “Philip” she
                    remembered.
                    “We’ll go in,” I said firmly, “and you shall see that
                    there is nothing to be afraid of.” I opened the door,
                    and the candle from behind threw a triangle of light
                    into the darkness. It fell upon a bare floor, pictureless
                    walls, and just tipped the high white ceiling overhead.
                    I pushed the door still wider open and we went in
                    hand in hand, Aileen shaking like a leaf in the wind.
                    How the scene lives in my mind, even as I write it
                    to-day so many years after it took place: the little child
                    in her nightgown facing me in that empty room of the
                    ancient building, all the passionate emotions of a tra-
                    gic history in the small young eyes, her mother like a
                    ghost in the passage, afraid to come in, the tossing
                    shadows thrown by the candle and the soft moan of
                    the night wind against the outside walls.
                    I made further passes over the small flushed face
                    and pressed my thumbs gently along the temples.
                    “Sleep!” I commanded; “sleep—and remember!” My
                    will poured over her being to control and protect. She
                    passed still deeper into the trance condition in which
                    the somnambulistic lucidity manifests itself and the
                    deeper self gives up its dead. Her eyes grew wider,
                    rounder, charged with memories as they fastened
                    themselves upon my own. The present, which a few
                    minutes before had threatened to claim her con-
                    sciousness by waking her, faded. She saw me no
                    longer as her familiar Uncle George, but as the faithful
                    friend and lover of her great story, Philip, the man
                    who had come to save her. There she stood in the
                    atmosphere of bygone days, in the very room where
                    she had known great suffering—this room that three
                    centuries ago had led by a corridor into the wing of
                    the house where now the beeches grew upon the
                    lawns.
                    She came up close and put her thin bare arms
                    about my neck and stared with peering, searching
                    eyes into mine.
                    “Remember what happened here,” I said resol-
                    utely. “Remember, and tell me.”
                    Her brows contracted slightly as with the effort,
                    and she whispered, glancing over her shoulder to
                    wards the farther end where the corridor once began,
                    “It hurts a little, but I—I’m in your arms, Philip dear,
                    and you will get me out, I know——”
                    “I hold you safe and you are in no danger, little
                    one,” I answered. “You can remember and speak
                    without it hurting you. Tell me.”
                    The suggestion, of course, operated instantly, for
                    her face cleared, and she dropped a great sigh of relief.
                    From time to time I continued the passes that held
                    the trance condition firm.
                    Then she spoke in a low, silvery little tone that cut
                    into me like a sword and searched my inmost parts. I
                    seemed to bleed internally. I could have sworn that
                    she spoke of things I knew as though I had lived
                    through them.
                    “This was when I last saw you,” she said, “this was
                    the room where you were to fetch me and carry me
                    away into happiness and safety from—him,” and it
                    was the voice and words of no mere child that said it;
                    “and this was where you did come on that night of
                    snow and wind. Through that window you entered;”
                    she pointed to the deep, embrasured window behind
                    us. “Can’t you hear the storm? How it howls and
                    screams! And the boom of the surf on the beach
                    below.... You left the horses outside, the swift horses
                    that were to carry us to the sea and away from all his
                    cruelties, and then—”
                    She hesitated and searched for words or memor-
                    ies; her face darkened with pain and loathing.
                    “Tell me the rest,” I ordered, “but forget all your
                    own pain.” And she smiled up at me with an expres-
                    sion of unbelievable tenderness and confidence while
                    I drew the frail form closer.
                    “You remember, Philip,” she went on, “you know
                    just what it was, and how he and his men seized you
                    the moment you stepped inside, and how you
                    struggled and called for me, and heard me answer—”
                    “Far away—outside—” I interrupted quickly, help-
                    ing her out of some flashing memory in my own deep
                    heart that seemed to burn and leave a scar. “You
                    answered from the lawn!”
                    “You thought it was the lawn, but really, you see, it
                    was there—in there,” and she point ed to the side of
                    the room on my right. She shook dreadfully, and her
                    voice dwindled most oddly in volume, as though com-
                    ing from a distance—almost muffled.
                    “In there?” I asked it with a shudder that put ice
                    and fire mingled in my blood.
                    “In the wall,” she whispered. “You see, some one
                    had betrayed us, and he knew you were coming. He
                    walled me up alive in there, and only left two little
                    holes for my eyes so that I could see. You heard my
                    voice calling through those holes, but you never knew
                    where I was. And then—”
                    Her knees gave way, and I had to hold her. She
                    looked suddenly with torture in her eyes down the
                    length of the room—towards the old wing of the
                    house.
                    “You won’t let him come,” she pleaded beseech-
                    ingly, and in her voice was the agony of death. “I
                    thought I heard him. Isn’t that his footsteps in the
                    corridor?” She listened fearfully, her eyes trying to
                    pierce the wall and see out on to the lawn.
                    “No one is coming, dear heart,” I said, with convic-
                    tion and authority. “Tell it all. Tell me every thing.”
                    “I saw the whole of it because I could not close my
                    eyes,” she continued. “There was an iron band round
                    my waist fastening me in—an iron belt I never could
                    escape from. The dust got into my mouth—I bit the
                    bricks. My tongue was scraped and bleeding, but
                    before they put in the last stones to smother me I saw
                    them—cut both your hands off so that you could
                    never save me—never let me out.”
                    She dashed without warning from my side and
                    flew up to the wall, beating it with her hands and cry-
                    ing aloud—
                    “Oh , you poor, poor thing. I know how awful it
                    was. I remember—when I was in you and you wore
                    and carried me, poor, poor body! That thunder of the
                    last brick as they drove it in against the mouth, and
                    the iron clamp that cut into the waist, and the suffoca-
                    tion and hunger and thirst!”
                    “What are you talking to in there?” I asked sternly,
                    crushing down the tears.
                    “The body I was in—the one he walled up—my
                    body—my own body!”
                    She flew back to my side. But even before my
                    cousin had uttered that “mother-cry” that broke in
                    upon the child’s deeper consciousness, disturbing the
                    memories, I had given the command with all the force
                    of my being to “forget” the pain. And only those few
                    who are familiar with the instantaneous changes of
                    emotion that can be produced by suggestion under
                    hypnosis will understand that Aileen came back to me
                    from that moment of “talking to the wall” with
                    laughter on her lips and in her eyes.
                    The small white figure with the cascade of dark
                    hair tumbling over the nightgown ran up and jumped
                    into my arms.
                    “But I saved you,” I cried, “you were never properly
                    walled-up; I got you out and took you away from him
                    over the sea, and we were happy ever after wards, like
                    the people in the fairy tales.” I drove the words into
                    her with my utmost force, and inevitably she accepted
                    them as the truth, for she clung to me with love and
                    laughter all over her child’s face of mystery, the horror
                    fading out, the pain swept clean away. With kaleido-
                    scopic suddenness the change came.
                    “So they never really cut your poor dead hands off
                    at all,” she said hesitatingly.
                    “Look! How could they? There they are! And I first
                    showed them to her and then pressed them against
                    her little cheeks, drawing her mouth up to be kissed.
                    “They’re big enough still and strong enough to carry
                    you off to bed and stroke you into so deep a sleep that
                    when you wake in the morning you will have forgotten
                    everything about your dark story, about Philip, Lady
                    Helen, the iron belt, the starvation, your cruel old
                    husband, and all the rest of it. You’ll wake up happy
                    and jolly just like any other child—”
                    “If you say so, of course I shall,” she answered,
                    smiling into my eyes.
                    And it was just then there came in that touch of
                    abomination that so nearly made my experiment a
                    failure, for it came with a black force that threatened
                    at first to discount all my “suggestion” and make it of
                    no account. My new command that she should forget
                    had apparently not yet fully registered itself in her
                    being; the tract of deeper consciousness that con-
                    structed the “Story” had not sunk quite below the
                    threshold. Thus she was still open to any detail of her
                    former suffering that might obtrude itself with suffi-
                    cient force. And such a detail did obtrude itself. This
                    touch of abomination was calculated with a really
                    superhuman ingenuity.
                    “Hark!” she cried—and it was that scream in a
                    whisper that only utter terror can produce—“Hark! I
                    hear his steps! He’s coming! Oh, I told you he was
                    coming! He’s in that passage!” pointing down the
                    room. And she first sprang from my arms as though
                    something burned her, and then almost instantly
                    again flew back to my protection. In that interval of a
                    few seconds she tore into the middle of the room, put
                    her hand to her ear to listen, and then shaded her eyes
                    in the act of peering down through the wall at the far
                    end. She stared at the very place where in olden days
                    the corridor had led into the vanished wing. The win-
                    dow my great-uncle had built into the wall now occu-
                    pied the exact spot where the opening had been.
                    Theresa then for the first time came forward with
                    a rush into the room, dropping the candle-grease over
                    the floor. She clutched me by the arm. The three of us
                    stood there—listening—listening apparently to
                    nought but the sighing of the sea-wind about the
                    walls, Aileen with her eyes buried in my coat. I was
                    standing erect trying in vain to catch the new sound. I
                    remember my cousin’s face of chalk with the flutter-
                    ing eyes and the candle held aslant.
                    Then suddenly she raised her hand and pointed
                    over my shoulder. I thought her jaw would drop fr om
                    her face. And she and the child both spoke in the
                    same breath the two sharp phrases that brought the
                    climax of the vile adventure upon us in that silent
                    room of night.
                    They were like two pistol-shots.
                    “My God! There’s a face watching us...!” I hear d
                    her voice, all choked and dry.
                    And at the same second, Aileen— “Oh, oh! He’s
                    seen us! ... He’s here! Look.... He’ll get me ... hide your
                    hands, hide your poor hands!”
                    And, turning to the place my cousin stared at, I
                    saw sure enough that a face—apparently a living
                    human face—was pressed against the window-pane,
                    framed between two hands as it tried to peer upon us
                    into the semi-obscurity of the room. I saw the swift
                    momentary rolling of the two eyes as the candle glare
                    fell upon them, and caught a glimpse even of the
                    hunched-up shoulders behind, as their owner, stand-
                    ing outside upon the lawn, stooped down a little to
                    see better. And though the apparition instantly with-
                    drew, I recognized it beyond question as the dark and
                    evil countenance of the butler. His breath still stained
                    the window.
                    Yet the strange thing was that Aileen, struggling
                    violently to bury herself amid the scanty folds of my
                    coat, could not possibly have seen what we saw, for her
                    face was turned from the window the entire time, and
                    from the way I held her she could never for a single
                    instant have been in a position to know. It all took
                    place behind her back.... A moment later, with her
                    eyes still hidden against me, I was carrying her swiftly
                    in my arms across the hall and up the main staircase
                    to the night nursery.
                    My difficulty with her was, of course, while she
                    hovered between the two states of sleep and waking,
                    for once I got her into bed and plunged her deeply
                    again into the trance condition, I was easily able to
                    control her slightest thought or emotion. Within ten
                    minutes she was sleeping peacefully, her little face
                    smoothed of all anxiety or terror, and my imperious
                    command ringing from end to end of her conscious-
                    ness that when she woke next morning all should be
                    forgotten. She was finally to forget ... utterly and com-
                    pletely.
                    And, meanwhile, of course, the man, when I went
                    with loathing and anger in my heart to his room in the
                    servants’ quarters, had a perfectly plausible explana-
                    tion. He was in the act of getting ready for bed, he
                    declared, when the noise had aroused his suspicions,
                    and, as in duty bound, he had made a tour of the
                    house outside, thinking to discover burglars....
                    With a month’s wages in his pocket, and a consid-
                    erable degree of wonder in his soul, probably—for the
                    man was guilty of nothing worse than innocently ter-
                    rifying a child’s imagination!—he went back to Lon-
                    don the following day; and a few hours later I myself
                    was travelling with Aileen and old Kempster over the
                    blue waves of the North Sea, carrying her off, curi-
                    ously enough, to freedom and happiness in the very
                    way her “imagination” had pictured her escape in the
                    “story” of long ago, when she was Lady Helen, held in
                    bondage by a cruel husband, and I was Philip, her
                    devoted lover.
                    Only this time her happiness was lasting and com-
                    plete. Hypnotic suggestion had wiped from her mind
                    the last vestige of her dreadful memories; her face was
                    wreathed in jolly smiles; her enjoyment of the journey
                    and our week in Antwerp was absolutely unclouded;
                    she played and laughed with all the radiance of an
                    unhaunted childhood, and her imagination was
                    purged and healed.
                    And when we got back her mother had again
                    moved her household gods to the original family man-
                    sion where she had first lived. Thither it was I took the
                    restored child, and there it was my cousin and I
                    looked up the old family records and verified certain
                    details of the history of De Lorne, that wicked and
                    semi-fabulous ancestor whose portrait hung in the
                    dark corner of the stairs. That his life was evil to the
                    brim I had always understood, but neither myself nor
                    Theresa had known—at least had not consciously
                    remembered—that he had married twice, and that his
                    first wife, Lady Helen, had mysteriously disappeared,
                    and Sir Philip Lansing, a neighbouring knight, sup-
                    posed to be her lover, had soon afterwards emigrated
                    to France and left his lands and property to go to ruin.
                    But another discovery I made, and kept to myself,
                    had to do with that “room of terror” in the old Norfolk
                    house where, on the plea of necessary renovation, I
                    had the stones removed, and in the very spot where
                    Aileen used to beat her hands against the bricks and
                    “talk to the wall,” the workmen under my own eyes
                    laid bare the skeleton of a woman, fastened to the
                    granite by means of a narrow iron band that encircled
                    the waist—the skeleton of some unfortunate who had
                    been walled-up alive and had come to her dreadful
                    death by the pangs of hunger, thirst and suffocation
                    centuries ago.
                </p>

			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
