<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Boy Messenger</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-boy-messenger" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Boy Messenger</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">A Christmas Fantasy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was the afternoon of Christmas Eve.</p>
			<p>Partly by train, partly on foot, they had come to a charming village, not much more than a dosen miles from London Bridge, and were sitting at tea looking out upon the garden of the inn, The dusk, lke a thin veil, gathered silently’ about them, and a curtain of wintry mist, half mo jure from the near woodlands, half smoke from the village, hung over the tum bled cottage roofs and shrouded the crests of the elm trees that circled the green.</p>
			<p>A few children played near the well, a line of white geese straggled over from the pond, aad a typical village dog strayed dangerously near the hoofs of a typical village donkey that was trying its best to nibble grass where grass there was none. For the rest, the hamlet seemed deserted, the street peopled by shadows only,’ and the dishevelled yew-tree in the church~ yard spread vaguely through the gloom tll it embraced the church and most of the gravestones into the com- pass of its aged arms.</p>
			<p>They were an unimaginative party. It is doubtful if any one of them pos- sessed sufficient insight to appreciate the feelings of an untipped waiter⁠—surely the least of tests⁠—and yet, be- fore the eyes of three of them, two girls and a man, this thing plainly happened. True, their accounts varied curiously when ‘they came. later to compare notes; but then accounts of the simplest occurrence⁠—say, a rabbit running across a read⁠—will vary amaz- ingly when half a dozen persons who saw it rum come to relate their im- pressions, So that proves nothing; the important thing is that something happened, and the observers started even. The rest remains to be told.</p>
			<p>They were waiting for the arrival of another friend, who was to bicycle over and meet them at the inn, and then return for the Christmas Eve pee when they realised that the cold kad grown suddenly much greater, and one of them⁠—it was the younger girl⁠—made the suggestion that they should go part of the way to meet him. The proposal was welcomed, ‘and instantly acted upon, and the man and the two girls were up and away in a twinkling, leaving the others behind to nurse the tea against their speedy return.</p>
			<p>“The moment we hear the bicycle bell we’ll make tea,” they shouted from the ina porch, a» the three forms scattered into the darkness, the voices and footsteps making an unusual clam our in the peaceful little hamlet.</p>
			<p>The road, winding like a white stream, and slippery with occasional ice, ran downhill out of the nest of cottages, and the trio followed its course headlong through the gloom, regardless of ruts or loose stones. A couple of villagers, walking briskly by, turned their heads to stare; a dog made a sudden run, barking shrilly @ cat shot silently across the road im front of them; and then, quite sud- denly the village was lett’ behind and the broad highway dwindled into a country lane. “As they ram, the hedge- rows flew past like palings with a level top, and the frosty evening ait, keen Sa re ene ead leaves, stung their checks si ly and whistled in their ears.”</p>
			<p>They bad gone perhaps half a mile in this way, still urging the pace downhill, “and they were running abreast along a clear stretch wit nothing to obstruct, so that all had the Same point of view, when suddenly⁠—sis where the accounts first to vary⁠—they realised that some- stood immediately in the road before them, som that brought them all up’ instinctively with a dead halt.</p>
			<p>How they managed it, going at that pace downhill, is hard to understand⁠—some things apparently possess the curious power compelling a stop⁠—for they came w a full halt as com- pletely as though they had charged an am iron barrier breast-high across the road. Panting and speech- they drew up in line as by com- moo instinct⁠—drew up in presence of a fourth.</p>
			<p>So tar at least, they were all agreed⁠—that it was a fourth.</p>
			<p>Outlined against the white road where a moment before had been empty dusk, of indehnute in the sia the lights, stock still and bang oo oremce ot thee path⁠—the slang alone. describes the uncompromising attitude of the thing⁠—stood this fourth ute, faci them with a deliberate calmness of survey that seemed a little than insolence, and only a little Jess than menace. ‘ Another second and ther headlong rush would have vent them ploughing over it as am ocean liner ploughs over a fishing smack in the mght, Moreover, so sudden Was the appearance, and so abrupt the halt, that for more than a whole minute they. merely stood in silence facing it, and staring bac with no thought of doing anything. To each of them the idea came that WAS Not possible to get past it, that there was no available space. Though actually diminutive, it seemed to fill the entire road just as a mail cart might have done. And, quite apart from this singular dex ept.on of sight, each member confessed afterwards io an uncommon emotion, which warned them that to force a way past was somehow not exactly the right, oF proper, or safe thing to do.</p>
			<p>So at first they stued and stared rather helplessly⁠—ull at jength theu Startled vision tocussed itself better and the man of the party, Hading bis renses, eBpressed the relieved convic- tion of them all with a loud exclama tion;⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why I declare, it’s only a boy after all!” he cred, with a laugh.</p>
			<p>Yet the words, as soon as uttered, had a false ring about them, for there was that about the figure of of this little boy~this diminutive person dressed in clothes of oe mreen, oddly cut, with the white face and large blue eyes so wide apart in it⁠—there was that about him which made it not difficult to imagine that, if he was something less than a man, he was at the same time something more than a boy. His self- possession was perfect The manner in which he dominated the entire road, gazing up so quietly and finedly at them⁠—peering it really was⁠—produced an effect privileged importance that was not calculated according to his mere size at any rate. Aided, perhaps. by the twilight and the background o! dark woods, he certainly managed to convey an impression, strangely in- sistent, of being other than he was⁠—other, at least, than these three saw him.</p>
			<p>And, beyond question, each one saw him differently⁠—at first, The picture varied astonishingly. For the elder girl thought it was a “woman or a shadow,’’ and her sister said it looked <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>:ke an animal on its hind legs, paus- ing to start in its flight across the road⁠—a hare, for instance, magnified hugely the dusk⁠—while the man could have sworn, he declared, that at first he saw several figures, a whole line of them, indeed, which had then suddenly telescoped down into the single outline of this diminutive boy.</p>
			<p>And the three accounts seem very suggestive of the curiously confusin, effect produced upon their sense 0! sight trom the very beginning.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>For a time no one said a word, and up the spines of. all three ran chills ot various degrees. For the place had turned suddenly lonely; no habitation was in sight; dark woods lay close at hand, with mist creeping everywhere over the sombre landscape; and, im- mediately in front of them, this imp- thine with the glowing eyes and the confident manner, barring their way. It was eerie; though what there contd be about a twilight country lane and an inquisitive little boy to make it so, no one of them could understand,</p>
			<p>And then, while a stray. breeze brought the dead leaves whirl-ng about their feet in a little rustling eddy,.the embarrassing silence was broken the fourth itself, who in a thin, p’pin voice, like wind blowing through small reeds, ejaculated a sound that all heard differently.</p>
			<p>“Surely it was my name that he called,’ was the thought in the mind of each.</p>
			<p>This, however, they discovered afterwards when comparing notes, and discussing the singular affair from every possible point of view; for at the actual moment the man of the party, remembering the character of the friend they were come to meet, and his love of practical joking, thought to see his hand in the behaviour of the youngster, and cried again with a laugh :⁠—</p>
			<p>“But it’s some elaborate trick of tlarry’s! He has sent the boy ahead to meet us, He is not far off himself at this very moment, and this is his messenger boy <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></p>
			<p>But was it really a boy! Did it cast a shadow like the rest of them under the gathering stars? Was it wnaccom- panied truly, or were those merely shapes of mist that rose and melted so mysteriously into one another beside the hedge yonder? And how was it so vividly impressed upon the minds of all that the boy stood there with a definite purpose, a deliberate mission, and sought to spell some message to their brains? For, afterwards, it came out clearly, that it was this conception of the messenger⁠—of someone come to tell something⁠—that had impressed and perplexed the unimaginative three far more than the mere differences of sight and hearing.</p>
			<p>“Let’s go back,” whispered⁠—the younger girl, ‘He frightens me.”</p>
			<p>It was the one who had most reason to wish for the arrival of the expected friend, and her vaice gave utterance to a secret emotion that was beginnin to stir in them all⁠—an emotion of chi presentiment and fear. The imp, how- ever, was far too fascinating tor this course to recommend itself just then,</p>
			<p>and the others soon found their voices</p>
			<p>and began to ply the little fellow with questions. First of all they asked him who he was and where he lived; and without speaking, he pointed in a vague way, waving his hand generally to include sky and fields as though it were impossible more particularly to give his name or describe the place where he dwelt.</p>
			<p>“He doesn’t know who he is, or where he hives,’’ cried the girl, who wanted the comforting lights of the inn, and the comfortable presence of the one they awaited. ‘He’s a goblin⁠—of course, but a very nice goblin,” she added quickly with an odd little forced laugh. The boy had turned his eyes upon her face. They seemed such</p>
			<p>old, old eyes, she declared afterwards by way of explanation,</p>
			<p>“Do you live in the village?’ asked the man next.</p>
			<p>The or shook his head with an in- describable gesture of contempt.</p>
			<p>“Then where do you live?’</p>
			<p>He opened his mouth so that they saw the white line of his teeth, and he began to utter a sound that was not unlike the throaty notes of a big bird. It continued for some seconds, but no words came, He stared at each of them in turn, the stream of sound broken at intervals by tiny explosions from the lips. It ost seemed as though speech were unfamiliar to him something he could not manage an was struggling with for the first time. Then they discovered that the child had a dreadful stammer but a stam- mer unlike anything they had ever heard before. It was fully a minute before he managed to produce the words, yet in the direction where he pointed finally there was nothing to be seen but ploughed fields looming darkly, and a few ragged and ungain- ly elms standing lke broken pillars in the night.</p>
			<p>“Over there⁠—beyond,” ’ was what he seemed to say,</p>
			<p>They began to realise somewhat vividly that it was a late December evening; the night gathered increas- ingly about them; in the tops of the high elms a faint wind stirred and whispered ; the face of the world grew unfamiliar, as though they were plunged <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>» some desolate region where uman help availed not. The shadows had come forth in troops and taken possession of the landscape, somehow altering it. For the moment they for- got their immediate purpose of meet- ing a hungry bicycle-rider and hurry ing back to tea at the inn, The pas- sage of time shpped back, as in dreams, to where it was af no account, and they stood there, half fascinated, hall frightened by this imp of a crea- ture who seemed to them about to fi a corner of the veil that hangs ever be- tween the illusions ef the broken enses and the realities that lie be- yond.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>But it was the boy himself who broke the spell by suddenly stepping forward and holding out his hands to them. A smile slipped out of his strange eves and ran is cus his face, making it shine.</p>
			<p>“Come,”’he said, without any sign now of a stammer, “come, and T will how you where T live, Your friend ts already there waiting.’</p>
			<p>And the imp mentioned him hy name!</p>
			<p>The younger girl⁠—she who most looked forward to his coming⁠—gave a perceptible start. and moved quickly backwards towards the hedge. Some- thing clutched at her heart, and made her horribly afraid.</p>
			<p>But at mention of their friend’s name, the man of the party burst into a cheery laugh.</p>
			<p>“There! he cried, “I told you it was Harry! It’s his idea of a Christ- mas joke. He’s gone on to the other imp, the Black Horse, and sent this imp of darkness to waylay us. Now we shall have two teas to negotiate!” He clapped his hands and turned to the girls behind him. ‘‘Come on,’’ he said, ‘‘let’s follow the youngster to the Black Horse and then send him to fetch the others.”</p>
			<p>Yet the man’s words seemed a sham, signifying nothing, or at most merely cheap bravado. They all stood stock still and made no pretence of moving. Their real business was with this boy who hovered there before them be- tween the dusk and the darkness, his hands still outstretched, an air of in- vitation in his face and manner. It was the boy’s message they wanted, yet dreaded to hear, the real message not yet delivered. His eyes, there in the gloom, were so preternaturally steady, so compelling, so stern almost for a ch ld, the younger girl thought. And they sought ever the one face, disregard.ng the other two. For each girl was positive he looked only into het own eyes, while the man after- wards declared that the boy looked only at him. To each the illusion was perfect,</p>
			<p>Thus it seemed an act of inspiration, bringing relief to the’ uneasy feelings of them all, when the man walked for- ward towards the imp, and into those outstretched hands⁠—cones coppers.</p>
			<p>Certainly it was a relief to see him pocket them without an instant’s hesi- tation, for this was an eminently hu- man proceeding. But the thin peal of elfin laughter that followed the action was not what they had expected, and the echoes that came from the leafless woods beyond, and prolonged the sound, made them all turn sharply about and try to face in every direction at once. The echoes had seemed so curiously like real voices.</p>
			<p>Then the man, by way of protest against the increasing strangeness of it all, resolved to test the spell more vigorously,</p>
			<p>“Come,” he cried, laughing rather boisterously, ‘we’ll play puss in the corner. You shall be puss, and each time you Bet into a corner you shall have a halfpenny.”</p>
			<p>The bey made no audible reply, but danced about lightly in the twilight in the middle of the lane, while the smile flitted over his face like the re- flections of an unseen lan‘ern and the others ran wildly from corner to cor- ner, till the imp hat finally won six pence. Jt was easy for him to w-n. The moment hé made for a corner, its occupant fled screaming into the lane. It was impossible, they felt, to con test the points of a merely human game with such a creature of the shad- ows and the dusk.</p>
			<p>Then occurred the strangest thing of all. The game was over and they were girding up their loins to follow the boy to the Black Horse first, and afterwards to their own inn, when, with a quick motion like the rush of a bird, he darted to the younger girl, flung down all the coppers into her hands, before she even guessed what he was about, whispered some words close to her face, uttered a shrill ery of laughter⁠—and was gone!</p>
			<p>“Oh, Ohl’ she cried out piteously⁠—and this time there was real pain and terror in her voice, ‘‘Now I know! Now I know why I was afraid!”</p>
			<p>She half fell backwards across a heap of broken stones, and the other two were swiftly at her side with sym- pathetic questions of alarm. But she was on her feet again in a second. She ran a few paces down the road to the spot where the boy had so mys- teriously vanished, None of them had seen exactly how we went, for one second he was there, and the next he was not there. That was all they knew. :</p>
			<p>The girl paused and held her hand to her side. She peered into the dark- ness.</p>
			<p>“Harry!” she called faintly; and again with anguish in her voice, “Harry! Are you there !’’</p>
			<p>ee were standing in the level space between the two sharp hills. In front of them, after an abrupt turn, the long white road seemed to run steeply into the sky. And it was down this hill that the coming bicyclist must shape his dangerous course.</p>
			<p>“There!” she cried again suddenly, running to the side of the road where the hedge ceased, and an open gap led the sight as a single plunge into ed space. ‘Oh, I knew it, I knew it!’</p>
			<p>And when the others joined her, and peered over the hedge they found themselves looking down into the chasm of a disused chalk pit, at the bottom of which in the faint glimmer of the lime and the starlight, lay the smashed bicycle, with the lifeless body of its rider outstretched beside it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
