<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			

<h2>THE TRYST</h2>

<p class="noi">&ldquo;<em xml:lang="fr" lang="fr" class="italic">Je suis la premi�re au rendez-vous. Je vous attends.</em>&rdquo;</p>


<p>As he got out of the train at the little wayside station he remembered
the conversation as if it had been yesterday, instead of fifteen years
ago&mdash;and his heart went thumping against his ribs so violently that
he almost heard it. The original thrill came over him again with all
its infinite yearning. He felt it as he had felt it <em class="italic">then</em>&mdash;not with
that tragic lessening the interval had brought to each repetition of
its memory. Here, in the  scenery of its birth, he
realised with mingled pain and wonder that the subsequent years had not
destroyed, but only dimmed it. The forgotten rapture flamed back with
all the fierce beauty of its genesis, desire at white heat. And the
shock of the abrupt discovery shattered time. Fifteen years became a
negligible moment; the crowded experiences that had intervened seemed
but a dream. The farewell scene, the conversation on the steamer&rsquo;s
deck, were clear as of the day before. He saw the hand holding her big
hat that fluttered in the wind, saw the flowers on the dress where the
long coat was blown open a moment, recalled the face of a hurrying
steward who had jostled them; he even heard the voices&mdash;his own and
hers:</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; she said simply; &ldquo;I promise you. You have my word. I&rsquo;ll wait&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Till I come back to find you,&rdquo; he interrupted.</p>

<p>Steadfastly she repeated his actual words, then added: &ldquo;Here; at
home&mdash;that is.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll come to the garden gate as usual,&rdquo; he told her, trying to smile.
&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll knock. You&rsquo;ll open the gate&mdash;as usual&mdash;and come out to me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>These words, too, she attempted to repeat, but her voice failed, her
eyes filled suddenly with tears; she looked into his face and nodded.
It was just then that her little hand went up to hold the hat on&mdash;he
saw the very gesture still. He remembered that he was vehemently
tempted to tear his ticket up there and then, to go ashore with her,
to stay in England, to brave all opposition&mdash;when the siren roared its
third horrible warning ... and the ship put out to sea.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Fifteen years, thick with various incident, had passed between them
since that moment. His life had risen, fallen, crashed, then risen
again. He had come back at last, fortune won by a lucky coup&mdash;at
thirty-five; had come back to find her, come back, above all, to keep
his word. Once every three months they had exchanged the brief letter
agreed upon: &ldquo;I am well; I am waiting; I am happy; I am unmarried.
Yours&mdash;&mdash;.&rdquo; For his youthful wisdom had insisted that no &ldquo;man&rdquo; had the
right to keep &ldquo;any woman&rdquo; too long waiting; and she, thinking that
letter brave and splendid, had insisted likewise that he was free&mdash;if
freedom called him. They had laughed over this last phrase in their
agreement. They put five years as the possible limit of separation.
By then he would have won success, and obstinate parents would have
nothing more to say.</p>

<p>But when the five years ended he was &ldquo;on his uppers&rdquo; in a western
mining town, and with the end of ten in sight those uppers, though
changed, were little better, apparently, than patched and mended. And
it was just then, too, that the change which had been stealing over
him betrayed itself. He realised it abruptly, a sense of shame and
horror in him. The discovery was made unconsciously&mdash;it disclosed
itself. He was reading her letter as a labourer on a Californian fruit
farm: &ldquo;Funny she doesn&rsquo;t marry&mdash;some one else!&rdquo; he heard himself say.
The words were out before he knew it, and certainly before he could
suppress them. They just slipped out, startling him into the truth;
and he knew instantly that the thought was fathered in him by a hidden
wish.&thinsp;... He was older. He had lived. It was a memory he loved.</p>

<p>Despising himself in a contradictory fashion&mdash;both vaguely and
fiercely&mdash;he yet held true to his boyhood&rsquo;s promise. He did not
write and offer to release her, as he knew they did in stories. He
persuaded himself that he meant to keep his word. There was this fine,
stupid, selfish obstinacy in his character. In any case, she would
misunderstand and think he wanted to set free&mdash;himself. &ldquo;Besides&mdash;I&rsquo;m
still&mdash;awfully fond of her,&rdquo; he asserted. And it was true; only the
love, it seemed, had gone its way. Not that another woman took it; he
kept himself clean, held firm as steel. The love, apparently, just
faded of its own accord; her image dimmed, her letters ceased to
thrill, then ceased to interest him.</p>

<p>Subsequent reflection made him realise other details about himself. In
the interval he had suffered hardships, had learned the uncertainty
of life that depends for its continuance on a little food, but that
food often hard to come by, and had seen so many others go under that
he held it more cheaply than of old. The wandering instinct, too, had
caught him, slowly killing the domestic impulse; he lost his desire for
a settled place of abode, the desire for children of his own, lost the
desire to marry at all. Also&mdash;he reminded himself with a smile&mdash;he had
lost other things: the expression of youth <em class="italic">she</em> was accustomed to and
held always in her thoughts of him, two fingers of one hand, his hair!
He wore glasses, too. The gentlemen-adventurers of life get scarred
in those wild places where he lived. He saw himself a rather battered
specimen well on the way to middle age.</p>

<p>There was confusion in his mind, however, <em class="italic">and</em> in his heart: a
struggling complex of emotions that made it difficult to know exactly
what he did feel. The dominant clue concealed itself. Feelings shifted.
A single, clear determinant did not offer. He was an honest fellow.
&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t quite make it out,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What is it I really feel? And
why?&rdquo; His motive seemed confused. To keep the flame alight for ten long
buffeting years was no small achievement; better men had succumbed in
half the time. Yet something in him still held fast to the girl as with
a band of steel that <em class="italic">would</em> not let her go entirely. Occasionally
there came strong reversions, when he ached with longing, yearning,
hope; when he loved her again; remembered passionately each detail of
the far-off courtship days in the forbidden rectory garden beyond the
small, white garden gate. Or was it merely the image and the memory he
loved &ldquo;again&rdquo;? He hardly knew himself. He could not tell. That &ldquo;again&rdquo;
puzzled him. It was the wrong word surely.&thinsp;... He still wrote the
promised letter, however; it was so easy; those short sentences could
not betray the dead or dying fires. One day, besides, he would return
and claim her. He meant to keep his word.</p>

<p>And he had kept it. Here he was, this calm September afternoon, within
three miles of the village where he first had kissed her, where the
marvel of first love had come to both; three short miles between him
and the little white garden gate of which at this very moment she was
intently thinking, and behind which some fifty minutes later she would
be standing, waiting for him.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>He had purposely left the train at an earlier station; he would walk
over in the dusk, climb the familiar steps, knock at the white gate
in the wall as of old, utter the promised words, &ldquo;I have come back to
find you,&rdquo; enter, and&mdash;keep his word. He had written from Mexico a week
before he sailed; he had made careful, even accurate calculations: &ldquo;In
the dusk, on the sixteenth of September, I shall come and knock,&rdquo; he
added to the usual sentences. The knowledge of his coming, therefore,
had been in her possession seven days. Just before sailing, moreover,
he had heard from her&mdash;though not in answer, naturally. She was well;
she was happy; she was unmarried; she was waiting.</p>

<p>And now, as by some magical process of restoration&mdash;possible to deep
hearts only, perhaps, though even by them quite inexplicable&mdash;the state
of first love had blazed up again in him. In all its radiant beauty it
lit his heart, burned unextinguished in his soul, set body and mind
on fire. The years had merely veiled it. It burst upon him, captured,
overwhelmed him with the suddenness of a dream. He stepped from the
train. He met it in the face. It took him prisoner. The familiar trees
and hedges, the unchanged countryside, the &ldquo;field-smells known in
infancy,&rdquo; all these, with something subtly added to them, rolled back
the passion of his youth upon him in a flood. No longer was he bound
upon what he deemed, perhaps, an act of honourable duty; it was love
that drove him, as it drove him fifteen years before. And it drove
him with the accumulated passion of desire long forcibly repressed;
almost as if, out of some fancied notion of fairness to the girl, he
had deliberately, yet still unconsciously, said &ldquo;No&rdquo; to it; that <em class="italic">she</em>
had not faded, but that he had decided, &ldquo;<em class="italic">I</em> must forget her.&rdquo; That
sentence: &ldquo;Why doesn&rsquo;t she marry&mdash;some one else?&rdquo; had not betrayed
change in himself. It surprised another motive: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not fair to&mdash;her!&rdquo;</p>

<p>His mind worked with a curious rapidity, but worked within one circle
only. The stress of sudden emotion was extraordinary. He remembered
a thousand things&mdash;yet, chief among them, those occasional reversions
when he had felt he &ldquo;loved her again.&rdquo; Had he not, after all, deceived
himself? Had she ever really &ldquo;faded&rdquo; at all? Had he not felt he ought
to let her fade&mdash;release her that way? And the change in himself?&mdash;that
sentence on the Californian fruit-farm&mdash;what did they mean? Which had
been true, the fading or the love?</p>

<p>The confusion in his mind was hopeless, but, as a matter of fact,
he did not think at all: he only <em class="italic">felt</em>. The momentum, besides, was
irresistible, and before the shattering onset of the sweet revival he
did not stop to analyse the strange result. He knew certain things, and
cared to know no others: that his heart was leaping, his blood running
with the heat of twenty, that joy recaptured him, that he must see,
hear, touch her, hold her in his arms&mdash;and marry her. For the fifteen
years had crumbled to a little thing, and at thirty-five he felt
himself but twenty, rapturously, deliciously in love.</p>

<p>He went quickly, eagerly down the little street to the inn, still
feeling only, not thinking anything. The vehement uprush of the old
emotion made reflection of any kind impossible. He gave no further
thought to those long years &ldquo;out there,&rdquo; when her name, her letters,
the very image of her in his mind, had found him, if not cold, at
least without keen response. All that was forgotten as though it had
not been. The steadfast thing in him, this strong holding to a promise
which had never wilted, ousted the recollection of fading and decay
that, whatever caused them, certainly <em class="italic">had</em> existed. And this steadfast
thing now took command. This enduring quality in his character led
him. It was only towards the end of the hurried tea he first received
the singular impression&mdash;vague, indeed, but undeniably persistent&mdash;the
strange impression that he was <em class="italic">being</em> led.</p>

<p>Yet, though aware of this, he did not pause to argue or reflect.
The emotional displacement in him, of course, had been more than
considerable: there had been upheaval, a change whose abruptness was
even dislocating, fundamental in a sense he could not estimate&mdash;shock.
Yet he took no count of anything but the one mastering desire to get to
her as soon as possible, knock at the small, white garden gate, hear
her answering voice, see the low wooden door swing open&mdash;take her.
There was joy and glory in his heart, and a yearning sweet delight. At
this very moment she was expecting him. And he&mdash;had come.</p>

<p>Behind these positive emotions, however, there lay concealed all
the time others that were of a negative character. Consciously, he
was not aware of them, but they were there; they revealed their
presence in various little ways that puzzled him. He recognised them
absentmindedly, as it were; did not analyse or investigate them.
For, through the confusion upon his faculties, rose also a certain
hint of insecurity that betrayed itself by a slight hesitancy or
miscalculation in one or two unimportant actions. There was a touch
of melancholy, too, a sense of something lost. It lay, perhaps, in
that tinge of sadness which accompanies the twilight of an autumn day,
when a gentler, mournful beauty veils a greater beauty that is past.
Some trick of memory connected it with a scene of early boyhood, when,
meaning to see the sunrise, he overslept, and, by a brief half-hour,
was just&mdash;too late. He noted it merely, then passed on; he did not
understand it; he hurried all the more, this hurry the only sign that
it <em class="italic">was</em> noted. &ldquo;I must be quick,&rdquo; flashed up across his strongly
positive emotions.</p>

<p>And, due to this hurry, possibly, were the slight miscalculations
that he made. They were very trivial. He rang for sugar, though the
bowl stood just before his eyes, yet when the girl came in he forgot
completely what he rang for&mdash;and inquired instead about the evening
trains to London. And, when the time-table was laid before him, he
examined it without intelligence, then looked up suddenly into the
maid&rsquo;s face with a question about flowers. Were there flowers to be had
in the village anywhere? What kind of flowers? &ldquo;Oh, a bouquet or a&rdquo;&mdash;he
hesitated, searching for a word that tried to present itself, yet was
not the word <em class="italic">he</em> wanted to make use of&mdash;&ldquo;or a wreath&mdash;of some sort?&rdquo;
he finished. He took the very word he did not want to take. In several
things he did and said, this hesitancy and miscalculation betrayed
themselves&mdash;such trivial things, yet significant in an elusive way that
he disliked. There was sadness, insecurity somewhere in them. And he
resented them, aware of their existence only because they qualified
his joy. There was a whispered &ldquo;No&rdquo; floating somewhere in the dusk.
Almost&mdash;he felt disquiet. He hurried, more and more eager to be off
upon his journey&mdash;the final part of it.</p>

<p>Moreover, there were other signs of an odd miscalculation&mdash;dislocation,
perhaps, properly speaking&mdash;in him. Though the inn was familiar from
his boyhood days, kept by the same old couple, too, he volunteered
no information about himself, nor asked a single question about the
village he was bound for. He did not even inquire if the rector&mdash;her
father&mdash;still were living. And when he left he entirely neglected the
gilt-framed mirror above the mantelpiece of plush, dusty pampas-grass
in waterless vases on either side. It did not matter, apparently,
whether he looked well or ill, tidy or untidy. He forgot that when
his cap was off the absence of thick, accustomed hair must alter him
considerably, forgot also that two fingers were missing from one hand,
the right hand, the hand that she would presently clasp. Nor did it
occur to him that he wore glasses, which must change his expression
and add to the appearance of the years he bore. None of these obvious
and natural things seemed to come into his thoughts at all. He was in
a hurry to be off. He did not think. But, though his mind may not have
noted these slight betrayals with actual sentences, his attitude,
nevertheless, expressed them. This was, it seemed, the <em class="italic">feeling</em> in
him: &ldquo;What could such details matter to her <em class="italic">now</em>? Why, indeed, should
he give to them a single thought? It was himself she loved and waited
for, not separate items of his external, physical image.&rdquo; As well think
of the fact that she, too, must have altered&mdash;outwardly. It never once
occurred to him. Such details were of To-day.&thinsp;... He was only impatient
to come to her quickly, very quickly, instantly, if possible. He
hurried.</p>

<p>There was a flood of boyhood&rsquo;s joy in him. He paid for his tea, giving
a tip that was twice the price of the meal, and set out gaily and
impetuously along the winding lane. Charged to the brim with a sweet
picture of a small, white garden gate, the loved face close behind it,
he went forward at a headlong pace, singing &ldquo;Nancy Lee&rdquo; as he used to
sing it fifteen years before.</p>

<p>With action, then, the negative sensations hid themselves, obliterated
by the positive ones that took command. The former, however, merely lay
concealed; they waited. Thus, perhaps, does vital emotion, overlong
restrained, denied, indeed, of its blossoming altogether, take revenge.
Repressed elements in his psychic life asserted themselves, selecting,
as though naturally, a dramatic form.</p>

<p>The dusk fell rapidly, mist rose in floating strips along the meadows
by the stream; the old, familiar details beckoned him forwards, then
drove him from behind as he went swiftly past them. He recognised
others rising through the thickening air beyond; they nodded, peered,
and whispered; sometimes they almost sang. And each added to his inner
happiness; each brought its sweet and precious contribution, and built
it into the reconstructed picture of the earlier, long-forgotten
rapture. It was an enticing and enchanted journey that he made,
something impossibly blissful in it, something, too, that seemed
curiously&mdash;inevitable.</p>

<p>
For the scenery had not altered all these years, the details of the
country were unchanged, everything he saw was rich with dear and
precious association, increasing the momentum of the tide that carried
him along. Yonder was the stile over whose broken step he had helped
her yesterday, and there the slippery plank across the stream where
she looked above her shoulder to ask for his support; he saw the
very bramble bushes where she scratched her hand, a-blackberrying,
the day before ... and, finally, the weather-stained signpost, &ldquo;To
the Rectory.&rdquo; It pointed to the path through the dangerous field
where Farmer Sparrow&rsquo;s bull provided such a sweet excuse for holding,
leading&mdash;protecting her. From the entire landscape rose a steam of
recent memory, each incident alive, each little detail brimmed with its
cargo of fond association.</p>

<p>He read the rough black lettering on the crooked arm&mdash;it was rather
faded, but he knew it too well to miss a single letter&mdash;and hurried
forward along the muddy track; he looked about him for a sign of Farmer
Sparrow&rsquo;s bull; he even felt in the misty air for the little hand that
he might take and lead her into safety. The thought of her drew him on
with such irresistible anticipation that it seemed as if the cumulative
drive of vanished and unsated years evoked the tangible phantom almost.
He actually felt it, soft and warm and clinging in his own, that was no
longer incomplete and mutilated.</p>

<p>Yet it was not he who led and guided now, but, more and more, he who
was being led. The hint had first betrayed its presence at the inn;
it now openly declared itself. It had crossed the frontier into a
positive sensation. Its growth, swiftly increasing all this time, had
accomplished itself; he had ignored, somehow, both its genesis and
quick development; the result he plainly recognised. She was expecting
him, indeed, but it was more than expectation; there was calling in
it&mdash;she summoned him. Her thought and longing reached him along that
old, invisible track love builds so easily between true, faithful
hearts. All the forces of her being, her very voice, came towards him
through the deepening autumn twilight. He had not noticed the curious
physical restoration in his hand, but he was vividly aware of this more
magical alteration&mdash;that <em class="italic">she</em> led and guided him, drawing him ever
more swiftly towards the little, white garden gate where she stood at
this very moment, waiting. Her sweet strength compelled him; there was
this new touch of something irresistible about the familiar journey,
where formerly had been delicious yielding only, shy, tentative
advance. He realised it&mdash;inevitable.</p>

<p>His footsteps hurried, faster and ever faster; so deep was the
allurement in his blood, he almost ran. He reached the narrow, winding
lane, and raced along it. He knew each bend, each angle of the holly
hedge, each separate incident of ditch and stone. He could have plunged
blindfold down it at top speed. The familiar perfumes rushed at
him&mdash;dead leaves and mossy earth and ferns and dock leaves, bringing
the bewildering currents of strong emotion in him all together as in
a rising wave. He saw, then, the crumbling wall, the cedars topping
it with spreading branches, the chimneys of the rectory. On his right
bulked the outline of the old, grey church; the twisted, ancient yews,
the company of gravestones, upright and leaning, dotting the ground
like listening figures. But he looked at none of these. For, on his
left, he already saw the five rough steps of stone that led from the
lane towards a small, white garden gate. That gate at last shone before
him, rising through the misty air. He reached it.</p>

<p>He stopped dead a moment. His heart, it seemed, stopped too, then took
to violent hammering in his brain. There was a roaring in his mind,
and yet a marvellous silence&mdash;just behind it. Then the roar of emotion
died away. There was utter stillness. This stillness, silence, was all
about him. The world seemed preternaturally quiet.</p>

<p>But the pause was too brief to measure. For the tide of emotion had
receded only to come on again with redoubled power. He turned, leaped
forward, clambered impetuously up the rough stone steps, and flung
himself, breathless and exhausted, against the trivial barrier that
stood between his eyes and&mdash;hers. In his wild, half violent impatience,
however, he stumbled. That roaring, too, confused him. He fell forward,
it seemed, for twilight had merged in darkness, and he misjudged the
steps, the distances he yet knew so well. For a moment, certainly, he
lay at full length upon the uneven ground against the wall; the steps
had tripped him. And then he raised himself and knocked. His right hand
struck upon the small, white garden gate. Upon the two lost fingers he
felt the impact. &ldquo;I am here,&rdquo; he cried, with a deep sound in his throat
as though utterance was choked and difficult. &ldquo;I have come back&mdash;to
find you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>For a fraction of a second he waited, while the world stood still and
waited with him. But there was no delay. Her answer came at once: &ldquo;I am
well.&thinsp;... I am happy.&thinsp;... I am waiting.&rdquo;</p>

<p>And the voice was dear and marvellous as of old. Though the words
were strange, reminding him of something dreamed, forgotten, lost,
it seemed, he did not take special note of them. He only wondered
that she did not open instantly that he might see her. Speech could
follow, but sight came surely first! There was this lightning-flash
of disappointment in him. Ah, she was lengthening out the marvellous
moment, as often and often she had done before. It was to tease him
that she made him wait. He knocked again; he pushed against the
unyielding surface. For he noticed that it was unyielding; and there
was a depth in the tender voice that he could not understand.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Open!&rdquo; he cried again, but louder than before. &ldquo;I have come back to
find you!&rdquo; And as he said it the mist struck cold and thick against his
face.</p>

<p>But her answer froze his blood.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I cannot open.&rdquo;</p>

<p>And a sudden anguish of despair rose over him; the sound of her voice
was strange; in it was faintness, distance&mdash;as well as depth. It seemed
to echo. Something frantic seized him then&mdash;the panic sense.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Open, open! Come out to me!&rdquo; he tried to shout. His voice failed
oddly; there was no power in it. Something appalling struck him between
the eyes. &ldquo;For God&rsquo;s sake, open. I&rsquo;m waiting here! Open, and come out
to me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The reply was muffled by distance that already seemed increasing; he
was conscious of freezing cold about him&mdash;in his heart.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I cannot open. You must come in to me. I&rsquo;m here and&mdash;waiting&mdash;always.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He knew not exactly then what happened, for the cold grew deeper and
the icy mist was in his throat. No words would come. He rose to his
knees, and from his knees to his feet. He stooped. With all his force
he knocked again; in a blind frenzy of despair he hammered and beat
against the unyielding barrier of the small, white garden gate. He
battered it till the skin of his knuckles was torn and bleeding&mdash;the
first two fingers of a hand already mutilated. He remembers the torn
and broken skin, for he noticed in the gloom that stains upon the
gate bore witness to his violence; it was not till afterwards that
he remembered the other fact&mdash;that the hand had already suffered
mutilation, long, long years ago. The power of sound was feebly in
him; he called aloud; there was no answer. He tried to scream, but the
scream was muffled in his throat before it issued properly; it was a
nightmare scream. As a last resort he flung himself bodily upon the
unyielding gate, with such precipitate violence, moreover, that his
face struck against its surface.</p>

<p>From the friction, then, along the whole length of his cheek he knew
that the surface was not smooth. Cold and rough that surface was; but
also&mdash;it was not of wood. Moreover, there was writing on it he had not
seen before. How he deciphered it in the gloom, he never knew. The
lettering was deeply cut. Perhaps he traced it with his fingers; his
right hand certainly lay stretched upon it. He made out a name, a date,
a broken verse from the Bible, and the words, &ldquo;died peacefully.&rdquo; The
lettering was sharply cut with edges that were new. For the date was of
a week ago; the broken verse ran, &ldquo;When the shadows flee away ...&rdquo; and
the small, white garden gate was unyielding because it was of&mdash;stone.</p>

<hr/>

<p>At the inn he found himself staring at a table from which the tea
things had not been cleared away. There was a railway time-table in
his hands, and his head was bent forwards over it, trying to decipher
the lettering in the growing twilight. Beside him, still fingering a
shilling, stood the serving-girl; her other hand held a brown tray
with a running dog painted upon its dented surface. It swung to and
fro a little as she spoke, evidently continuing a conversation her
customer had begun. For she was giving information&mdash;in the colourless,
disinterested voice such persons use:</p>

<p>&ldquo;We all went to the funeral, sir, all the country people went. The
grave was her father&rsquo;s&mdash;the family grave.&thinsp;...&rdquo; Then, seeing that her
customer was too absorbed in the time-table to listen further, she said
no more but began to pile the tea things on to the tray with noisy
clatter.</p>

<p>Ten minutes later, in the road, he stood hesitating. The signal at the
station just opposite was already down. The autumn mist was rising. He
looked along the winding road that melted away into the distance, then
slowly turned and reached the platform just as the London train came
in. He felt very old&mdash;too old to walk six miles.&thinsp;...</p>
</div>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
