<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			

<div class="chapter">
<h2 class="mt3"><br />
THE TOUCH OF PAN</h2>
<h3>1</h3>

<p> idiot, Heber understood, was a person in whom intelligence had been
arrested&mdash;instinct acted, but not reason. A lunatic, on the other hand,
was some one whose reason had gone awry&mdash;the mechanism of the brain
was injured. The lunatic was out of relation with his environment; the
idiot had merely been delayed <em>en route</em>.</p>

<p>Be that as it might, he knew at any rate that a lunatic was not to
be listened to, whereas an idiot&mdash;well, the one he fell in love with
certainly had the secret of some instinctual knowledge that was not
only joy, but a kind of sheer natural joy. Probably it was that sheer
natural joy of living that reason argues to be untaught, degraded.
In any case&mdash;at thirty&mdash;he married her instead of the daughter of
a duchess he was engaged to. They lead to-day that happy, natural,
vagabond life called idiotic, unmindful of that world the majority of
reasonable people live only to remember.</p>

<p>Though born into an artificial social clique that made it difficult,
Heber had always loved the simple things. Nature, especially, meant
much to him. He would rather see a woodland misty with bluebells than
all the ch�teaux on the Loire; the thought of a mountain valley in the
dawn made his feet lonely in the grandest houses. Yet in these very
houses was his home established. Not that he under-estimated worldly
things&mdash;their value was too obvious&mdash;but that it was another thing he
wanted. Only he did not know precisely <em>what</em> he wanted until this
particular idiot made it plain.</p>

<p>
Her case was a mild one, possibly; the title bestowed by implication
rather than by specific mention. Her family did not say that she was
imbecile or half-witted, but that she &ldquo;was not all there&rdquo; they probably
did say. Perhaps she saw men as trees walking, perhaps she saw through
a glass darkly. Heber, who had met her once or twice, though never
yet to speak to, did not analyse her degree of sight, for in him,
personally, she woke a secret joy and wonder that almost involved a
touch of awe. The part of her that was not &ldquo;all there&rdquo; dwelt in an
&ldquo;elsewhere&rdquo; that he longed to know about. He wanted to share it with
her. She seemed aware of certain happy and desirable things that reason
and too much thinking hide.</p>

<p>He just felt this instinctively without analysis. The values they set
upon the prizes of life were similar. Money to her was just stamped
metal, fame a loud noise of sorts, position nothing. Of people she was
aware as a dog or bird might be aware&mdash;they were kind or unkind. Her
parents, having collected much metal and achieved position, proceeded
to make a loud noise of sorts with some success; and since she did
not contribute, either by her appearance or her tastes, to their
ambitions, they neglected her and made excuses. They were ashamed of
her existence. Her father in particular justified Nietzsche&rsquo;s shrewd
remark that no one with a loud voice can listen to subtle thoughts.</p>

<p>She was, perhaps, sixteen&mdash;for, though she looked it, eighteen or
nineteen was probably more in accord with her birth certificate. Her
mother was content, however, that she should dress the lesser age,
preferring to tell strangers that she was childish, rather than admit
that she was backward.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll never marry at all, child, much less marry as you might,&rdquo; she
said, &ldquo;if you go about with that rabbit expression on your face. That&rsquo;s
not the way to catch a nice young man of the sort we get down to stay
with us now. Many a chorus-girl with less than you&rsquo;ve got has caught
them easily enough. Your sister&rsquo;s done well. Why not do the same?
There&rsquo;s nothing to be shy or frightened about.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But I&rsquo;m not shy or frightened, mother. I&rsquo;m bored. I mean <em>they</em> bore
me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It made no difference to the girl; she was herself. The bored
expression in the eyes&mdash;the rabbit, not-all-there expression&mdash;gave
place sometimes to another look. Yet not often, nor with anybody. It
was this other look that stirred the strange joy in the man who fell in
love with her. It is not to be easily described. It was very wonderful.
Whether sixteen or nineteen, she then looked&mdash;a thousand.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The house-party was of that up-to-date kind prevalent in Heber&rsquo;s
world. Husbands and wives were not asked together. There was a cynical
disregard of the decent (not the stupid) conventions that savoured
of abandon, perhaps of decadence. He only went himself in the hope
of seeing the backward daughter once again. Her millionaire parents
afflicted him, the smart folk tired him. Their peculiar affectation of
a special language, their strange belief that they were of importance,
their treatment of the servants, their calculated self-indulgence, all
jarred upon him more than usual. At bottom he heartily despised the
whole vapid set. He felt uncomfortable and out of place. Though not a
prig, he abhorred the way these folk believed themselves the climax of
fine living. Their open immorality disgusted him, their indiscriminate
love-making was merely rather nasty; he watched the very girl he was at
last to settle down with behaving as the tone of the clique expected
over her final fling&mdash;and, bored by the strain of so much &ldquo;modernity,&rdquo;
he tried to get away. Tea was long over, the sunset interval invited,
he felt hungry for trees and fields that were not self-conscious&mdash;and
he escaped. The flaming June day was turning chill. Dusk hovered over
the ancient house, veiling the pretentious new wing that had been
added. And he came across the idiot girl at the bend of the drive,
where the birch trees shivered in the evening wind. His heart gave a
leap.</p>

<p>She was leaning against one of the dreadful statues&mdash;it was a
satyr&mdash;that sprinkled the lawn. Her back was to him; she gazed at a
group of broken pine trees in the park beyond. He paused an instant,
then went on quickly, while his mind scurried to recall her name. They
were within easy speaking range.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Miss Elizabeth!&rdquo; he cried, yet not too loudly lest she might vanish
as suddenly as she had appeared. She turned at once. Her eyes and lips
were smiling welcome at him without pretence. She showed no surprise.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You&rsquo;re the first one of the lot who&rsquo;s said it properly,&rdquo; she
exclaimed, as he came up. &ldquo;Everybody calls me Elizabeth instead of
Elspeth. It&rsquo;s idiotic. They don&rsquo;t even take the trouble to get a name
right.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is,&rdquo; he agreed. &ldquo;Quite idiotic.&rdquo; He did not correct her. Possibly
he had said Elspeth after all&mdash;the names were similar. Her perfectly
natural voice was grateful to his ear, and soothing. He looked at
her all over with an open admiration that she noticed and, without
concealment, liked. She was very untidy, the grey stockings on her
vigorous legs were torn, her short skirt was spattered with mud.
Her nut-brown hair, glossy and plentiful, flew loose about neck
and shoulders. In place of the usual belt she had tied a coloured
handkerchief round her waist. She wore no hat. What she had been doing
to get in such a state, while her parents entertained a &ldquo;distinguished&rdquo;
party, he did not know, but it was not difficult to guess. Climbing
trees or riding bareback and astride was probably the truth. Yet
her dishevelled state became her well, and the welcome in her face
delighted him. She remembered him, she was glad. He, too, was glad,
and a sense both happy and reckless stirred in his heart. &ldquo;Like a wild
animal,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;you come out in the dusk&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;To play with my kind,&rdquo; she answered in a flash, throwing him a glance
of invitation that made his blood go dancing.</p>

<p>He leaned against the statue a moment, asking himself why this young
Cinderella of a parvenu family delighted him when all the London
beauties left him cold. There was a lift through his whole being as
he watched her, slim and supple, grace shining through the untidy
modern garb&mdash;almost as though she wore no clothes. He thought of a
panther standing upright. Her poise was so alert&mdash;one arm upon the
marble ledge, one leg bent across the other, the hip-line showing like
a bird&rsquo;s curved wing. Wild animal or bird, flashed across his mind:
something untamed and natural. Another second, and she might leap
away&mdash;or spring into his arms.</p>

<p>It was a deep, stirring sensation in him that produced the mental
picture. &ldquo;Pure and natural,&rdquo; a voice whispered with it in his heart,
&ldquo;as surely as <em>they</em> are just the other thing!&rdquo; And the thrill struck
with unerring aim at the very root of that unrest he had always known
in the state of life to which he was called. She made it natural,
clean, and pure. This girl and himself were somehow kin. The primitive
thing broke loose in him.</p>

<p>In two seconds, while he stood with her beside the vulgar statue,
these thoughts passed through his mind. But he did not at first give
utterance to any of them. He spoke more formally, although laughter,
due to his happiness, lay behind:</p>

<p>&ldquo;They haven&rsquo;t asked you to the party, then? Or you don&rsquo;t care about it?
Which is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Both,&rdquo; she said, looking fearlessly into his face. &ldquo;But I&rsquo;ve been here
ten minutes already. Why were you so long?&rdquo;</p>

<p>This outspoken honesty was hardly what he expected, yet in another
sense he was not surprised. Her eyes were very penetrating, very
innocent, very frank. He felt her as clean and sweet as some young
fawn that asks plainly to be stroked and fondled. He told the truth:
&ldquo;I couldn&rsquo;t get away before. I had to play about and&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; when she
interrupted with impatience:</p>

<p>&ldquo;<em>They</em> don&rsquo;t really want you,&rdquo; she exclaimed scornfully. &ldquo;I do.&rdquo;</p>

<p>And, before he could choose one out of the several answers that rushed
into his mind, she nudged him with her foot, holding it out a little so
that he saw the shoelace was unfastened. She nodded her head towards
it, and pulled her skirt up half an inch as he at once stooped down.</p>

<p>&ldquo;And, anyhow,&rdquo; she went on as he fumbled with the lace, touching her
ankle with his hand, &ldquo;you&rsquo;re going to marry one of them. I read it in
the paper. It&rsquo;s idiotic. You&rsquo;ll be miserable.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The blood rushed to his head, but whether owing to his stooping or to
something else, he could not say.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I only came&mdash;I only accepted,&rdquo; he said quickly, &ldquo;because I wanted to
see <em>you</em> again.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Of course. I made mother ask you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He did an impulsive thing. Kneeling as he was, he bent his head a
little lower and suddenly kissed the soft grey stocking&mdash;then stood
up and looked her in the face. She was laughing happily, no sign of
embarrassment in her anywhere, no trace of outraged modesty. She just
looked very pleased.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve tied a knot that won&rsquo;t come undone in a hurry&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; he began,
then stopped dead. For as he said it, gazing into her smiling face,
another expression looked forth at him from the two big eyes of
hazel. Something rushed from his heart to meet it. It may have been
that playful kiss, it may have been the way she took it; but, at any
rate, there was a strength in the new emotion that made him unsure of
who he was and of whom he looked at. He forgot the place, the time,
his own identity and hers. The lawn swept from beneath his feet, the
English sunset with it. He forgot his host and hostess, his fellow
guests, even his father&rsquo;s name and his own into the bargain. He was
carried away upon a great tide, the girl always beside him. He left the
shore-line in the distance, already half forgotten, the shore-line of
his education, learning, manners, social point of view&mdash;everything to
which his father had most carefully brought him up as the scion of an
old-established English family. This girl had torn up the anchor. Only
the anchor had previously been loosened a little by his own unconscious
and restless efforts.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>Where was she taking him to? Upon what island would they land?</p>

<p>&ldquo;I&rsquo;m younger than you&mdash;a good deal,&rdquo; she broke in upon his rushing
mood. &ldquo;But that doesn&rsquo;t matter a bit, does it? We&rsquo;re about the same age
really.&rdquo;</p>

<p>With the happy sound of her voice the extraordinary sensation
passed&mdash;or, rather, it became normal. But that it had lasted an
appreciable time was proved by the fact that they had left the statue
on the lawn, the house was no longer visible behind them, and they were
walking side by side between the massive rhododendron clumps. They
brought up against a five-barred gate into the park. They leaned upon
the topmost bar, and he felt her shoulder touching his&mdash;edging into
it&mdash;as they looked across to the grove of pines.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I feel absurdly young,&rdquo; he said without a sign of affectation, &ldquo;and
yet I&rsquo;ve been looking for you a thousand years and more.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The afterglow lit up her face; it fell on her loose hair and tumbled
blouse, turning them amber red. She looked not only soft and comely,
but extraordinarily beautiful. The strange expression haunted the deep
eyes again, the lips were a little parted, the young breast heaving
slightly, joy and excitement in her whole presentment. And as he
watched her he knew that all he had just felt was due to her close
presence, to her atmosphere, her perfume, her physical warmth and
vigour. It had emanated directly from her being.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; she said, and laughed so that he felt her breath upon his
face. He bent lower to bring his own on a level, gazing straight into
her eyes that were fixed upon the field beyond. They were clear and
luminous as pools of water, and in their centre, sharp as a photograph,
he saw the reflection of the pine grove, perhaps a hundred yards
away. With detailed accuracy he saw it, empty and motionless in the
glimmering June dusk.</p>

<p>Then something caught his eye. He examined the picture more closely.
He drew slightly nearer. He almost touched her face with his own,
forgetting for a moment whose were the eyes that served him for a
mirror. For, looking intently thus, it seemed to him that there was
a movement, a passing to and fro, a stirring as of figures among the
trees.&thinsp;... Then suddenly the entire picture was obliterated. She had
dropped her lids. He heard her speaking&mdash;the warm breath was again upon
his face:</p>

<p>&ldquo;In the heart of that wood dwell I.&rdquo;</p>

<p>His heart gave another leap&mdash;more violent than the first&mdash;for the
wonder and beauty of the sentence caught him like a spell. There was
a lilt and rhythm in the words that made it poetry. She laid emphasis
upon the pronoun and the nouns. It seemed the last line of some
delicious runic verse:</p>

<p>&ldquo;In the <em>heart</em> of the <em>wood</em>&mdash;dwell <em>I</em>.&thinsp;...&rdquo;</p>

<p>And it flashed across him: That living, moving, inhabited pine wood
was her thought. It was thus she saw it. Her nature flung back to a
life she understood, a life that needed, claimed her. The ostentatious
and artificial values that surrounded her, she denied, even as the
distinguished house-party of her ambitious, masquerading family
neglected her. Of course she was unnoticed by them, just as a swallow
or a wild-rose were unnoticed.</p>

<p>He knew her secret then, for she had told it to him. It was his own
secret too. They were akin, as the birds and animals were akin. They
belonged together in some free and open life, natural, wild, untamed.
That unhampered life was flowing about them now, rising, beating with
delicious tumult in her veins and his, yet innocent as the sunlight and
the wind&mdash;because it was as freely recognised.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Elspeth!&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;come, take me with you! We&rsquo;ll go at once.
Come&mdash;hurry&mdash;before we forget to be happy, or remember to be wise
again&mdash;&mdash;!&rdquo;</p>

<p>His words stopped half-way towards completion, for a perfume floated
past him, born of the summer dusk, perhaps, yet sweet with a
penetrating magic that made his senses reel with some remembered joy.
No flower, no scented garden bush delivered it. It was the perfume of
young, spendthrift life, sweet with the purity that reason had not yet
stained. The girl moved closer. Gathering her loose hair between her
fingers, she brushed his cheeks and eyes with it, her slim, warm body
pressing against him as she leaned over laughingly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;In the darkness,&rdquo; she whispered in his ear; &ldquo;when the moon puts the
house upon the statue!&rdquo;</p>

<p>And he understood. Her world lay behind the vulgar, staring day. He
turned. He heard the flutter of skirts&mdash;just caught the grey stockings,
swift and light, as they flew behind the rhododendron masses. And she
was gone.</p>

<p>He stood a long time, leaning upon that five-barred gate.&thinsp;... It was
the dressing-gong that recalled him at length to what seemed the
present. By the conservatory door, as he went slowly in, he met his
distinguished cousin&mdash;who was helping the girl he himself was to marry
to enjoy her &ldquo;final fling.&rdquo; He looked at his cousin. He realised
suddenly that he was merely vicious. There was no sun and wind, no
flowers&mdash;there was depravity only, lust instead of laughter, excitement
in place of happiness. It was calculated, not spontaneous. His mind was
in it. Without joy it was. He was not natural.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Not a girl in the whole lot fit to look at,&rdquo; he exclaimed with peevish
boredom, excusing himself stupidly for his illicit conduct. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m
off in the morning.&rdquo; He shrugged his blue-blooded shoulders. &ldquo;These
millionaires! Their shooting&rsquo;s all right, but their mixum-gatherum
week-ends&mdash;bah!&rdquo; His gesture completed all he had to say about this one
in particular. He glanced sharply, nastily, at his companion. &ldquo;<em>You</em>
look as if you&rsquo;d found something!&rdquo; he added, with a suggestive grin.
&ldquo;Or have you seen the ghost that was paid for with the house?&rdquo; And he
guffawed and let his eyeglass drop. &ldquo;Lady Hermione will be asking for
an explanation&mdash;eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Idiot!&rdquo; replied Heber, and ran upstairs to dress for dinner.</p>

<p>But the word was wrong, he remembered, as he closed his door. It was
lunatic he had meant to say, yet something more as well. He saw the
smart, modern philanderer somehow as a beast.</p>


<h3>2</h3>

<p>It was nearly midnight when he went up to bed, after an evening of
intolerable amusement. The abandoned moral attitude, the common
rudeness, the contempt of all others but themselves, the ugly jests,
the horseplay of tasteless minds that passed for gaiety, above all the
shamelessness of the women that behind the cover of fine breeding aped
emancipation, afflicted him to a boredom that touched desperation.</p>

<p>He understood now with a clarity unknown before. As with his cousin,
so with these. They took life, he saw, with a brazen effrontery they
thought was freedom, while yet it was life that they denied. He felt
vampired and degraded; spontaneity went out of him. The fact that
the geography of bedrooms was studied openly seemed an affirmation
of vice that sickened him. Their ways were nauseous merely. He
escaped&mdash;unnoticed.</p>

<p>He locked his door, went to the open window, and looked out into the
night&mdash;then started. For silver dressed the lawn and park, the shadow
of the building lay dark across the elaborate garden, and the moon, he
noticed, was just high enough to put the house upon the statue. The
chimney-stacks edged the pedestal precisely.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Odd!&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;Odd that I should come at the very moment&mdash;&mdash;!&rdquo;
then smiled as he realised how his proposed adventure would be
misinterpreted, its natural innocence and spirit ruined&mdash;if he were
seen. &ldquo;And some one would be sure to see me on a night like this. There
are couples still hanging about in the garden.&rdquo; And he glanced at the
shrubberies and secret paths that seemed to float upon the warm June
air like islands.</p>

<p>He stood for a moment framed in the glare of the electric light, then
turned back into the room; and at that instant a low sound like a
bird-call rose from the lawn below. It was soft and flutey, as though
some one played two notes upon a reed, a piping sound. He had been
seen, and she was waiting for him. Before he knew it, he had made an
answering call, of oddly similar kind, then switched the light out.
Three minutes later, dressed in simpler clothes, with a cap pulled over
his eyes, he reached the back lawn by means of the conservatory and the
billiard-room. He paused a moment to look about him. There was no one,
although the lights were still ablaze. &ldquo;I am an idiot,&rdquo; he chuckled to
himself. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m acting on instinct!&rdquo; He ran.</p>

<p>The sweet night air bathed him from head to foot; there was strength
and cleansing in it. The lawn shone wet with dew. He could almost smell
the perfume of the stars. The fumes of wine, cigars and artificial
scent were left behind, the atmosphere exhaled by civilisation, by
heavy thoughts, by bodies overdressed, unwisely stimulated&mdash;all, all
forgotten. He passed into a world of magical enchantment. The hush of
the open sky came down. In black and white the garden lay, brimmed full
with beauty, shot by the ancient silver of the moon, spangled with the
stars&rsquo; old-gold. And the night wind rustled in the rhododendron masses
as he flew between them.</p>

<p>In a moment he was beside the statue, engulfed now by the shadow of
the building, and the girl detached herself silently from the blur of
darkness. Two arms were flung about his neck, a shower of soft hair
fell on his cheek with a heady scent of earth and leaves and grass, and
the same instant they were away together at full speed&mdash;towards the
pine wood. Their feet were soundless on the soaking grass. They went
so swiftly that they made a whir of following wind that blew her hair
across his eyes.</p>

<p>And the sudden contrast caused a shock that put a blank, perhaps,
upon his mind, so that he lost the standard of remembered things. For
it was no longer merely a particular adventure; it seemed a habit
and a natural joy resumed. It was not new. He knew the momentum of
an accustomed happiness, mislaid, it may be, but certainly familiar.
They sped across the gravel paths that intersected the well-groomed
lawn, they leaped the flower-beds, so laboriously shaped in mockery,
they clambered over the ornamental iron railings, scorning the easier
five-barred gate into the park. The longer grass then shook the dew
in soaking showers against his knees. He stooped, as though in some
foolish effort to turn up something, then realised that his legs, of
course, were bare. <em>Her</em> garment was already high and free, for she,
too, was barelegged like himself. He saw her little ankles, wet and
shining in the moonlight, and flinging himself down, he kissed them
happily, plunging his face into the dripping, perfumed grass. Her
ringing laughter mingled with his own, as she stooped beside him the
same instant; her hair hung in a silver cloud; her eyes gleamed through
its curtain into his; then, suddenly, she soaked her hands in the heavy
dew and passed them over his face with a softness that was like the
touch of some scented southern wind.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now you are anointed with the Night,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;No one will know
you. You are forgotten of the world. Kiss me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll play for ever and ever,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;the eternal game that was
old when the world was yet young,&rdquo; and lifting her in his arms he
kissed her eyes and lips. There was some natural bliss of song and
dance and laughter in his heart, an elemental bliss that caught them
together as wind and sunlight catch the branches of a tree. She leaped
from the ground to meet his swinging arms. He ran with her, then tossed
her off and caught her neatly as she fell. Evading a second capture,
she danced ahead, holding out one shining arm that he might follow.
Hand in hand they raced on together through the clean summer moonlight.
Yet there remained a smooth softness as of fur against his neck and
shoulders, and he saw then that she wore skins of tawny colour that
clung to her body closely, that he wore them too, and that her skin,
like his own, was of a sweet dusky brown.</p>

<p>Then, pulling her towards him, he stared into her face. She suffered
the close gaze a second, but no longer, for with a burst of sparkling
laughter again she leaped into his arms, and before he shook her free
she had pulled and tweaked the two small horns that hid in the thick
curly hair behind, and just above, the ears.</p>

<p>And that wilful tweaking turned him wild and reckless. That touch ran
down him deep into the mothering earth. He leaped and ran and sang with
a great laughing sound. The wine of eternal youth flushed all his veins
with joy, and the old, old world was young again with every impulse of
natural happiness intensified with the Earth&rsquo;s own foaming tide of life.</p>

<p>From head to foot he tingled with the delight of Spring, prodigal with
creative power. Of course he could fly the bushes and fling wild across
the open! Of course the wind and moonlight fitted close and soft about
him like a skin! Of course he had youth and beauty for playmates, with
dancing, laughter, singing, and a thousand kisses! For he and she were
natural once again. They were free together of those long-forgotten
days when &ldquo;Pan leaped through the roses in the month of June&thinsp;...!&rdquo;</p>

<p>With the girl swaying this way and that upon his shoulders, tweaking
his horns with mischief and desire, hanging her flying hair before his
eyes, then bending swiftly over again to lift it, he danced to join the
rest of their companions in the little moonlit grove of pines beyond.&thinsp;...</p>


<h3>3</h3>

<p>They rose somewhat pointed, perhaps, against the moonlight, those
English pines&mdash;more with the shape of cypresses, some might have
thought. A stream gushed down between their roots, there were mossy
ferns, and rough grey boulders with lichen on them. But there was
no dimness, for the silver of the moon sprinkled freely through the
branches like the faint sunlight that it really was, and the air ran
out to meet them with a heady fragrance that was wiser far than wine.</p>

<p>The girl, in an instant, was whirled from her perch on his shoulders
and caught by a dozen arms that bore her into the heart of the jolly,
careless throng. Whisht! Whew! Whir! She was gone, but another, fairer
still, was in her place, with skins as soft and knees that clung as
tightly. Her eyes were liquid amber, grapes hung between her little
breasts, her arms entwined about him, smoother than marble, and as
cool. She had a crystal laugh.</p>

<p>But he flung her off, so that she fell plump among a group of bigger
figures lolling against a twisted root and roaring with a jollity that
boomed like wind through the chorus of a song. They seized her, kissed
her, then sent her flying. They were happier with their glad singing.
They held stone goblets, red and foaming, in their broad-palmed hands.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The mountains lie behind us!&rdquo; cried a figure dancing past. &ldquo;We are
come at last into our valley of delight. Grapes, breasts, and rich red
lips! Ho! Ho! It is time to press them that the juice of life may run!&rdquo;
He waved a cluster of ferns across the air and vanished amid a cloud of
song and laughter.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is ours. Use it!&rdquo; answered a deep, ringing voice. &ldquo;The valleys are
our own. No climbing now!&rdquo; And a wind of echoing cries gave answer from
all sides. &ldquo;Life! Life! Life! Abundant, flowing over&mdash;use it, use it!&rdquo;</p>

<p>A troop of nymphs rushed forth, escaped from clustering arms and lips
they yet openly desired. He chased them in and out among the waving
branches, while she who had brought him ever followed, and sped past
him and away again. He caught three gleaming soft brown bodies, then
fell beneath them, smothered, bubbling with joyous laughter&mdash;next freed
himself and, while they sought to drag him captive again, escaped and
raced with a leap upon a slimmer, sweeter outline that swung up&mdash;only
just in time&mdash;upon a lower bough, whence she leaned down above him with
hanging net of hair and merry eyes. A few feet beyond his reach, she
laughed and teased him&mdash;the one who had brought him in, the one he ever
sought, and who for ever sought him too.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>It became a riotous glory of wild children who romped and played with
an impassioned glee beneath the moon. For the world was young and they,
her happy offspring, glowed with the life she poured so freely into
them. All intermingled, the laughing voices rose into a foam of song
that broke against the stars. The difficult mountains had been climbed
and were forgotten. Good! Then, enjoy the luxuriant, fruitful valley
and be glad! And glad they were, brimful with spontaneous energy,
natural as birds and animals that obeyed the big, deep rhythm of a
simpler age&mdash;natural as wind and innocent as sunshine.</p>

<p>Yet, for all the untamed riot, there was a lift of beauty pulsing
underneath. Even when the wildest abandon approached the heat of orgy,
when the recklessness appeared excess&mdash;there hid that marvellous touch
of loveliness which makes the natural sacred. There was coherence,
purpose, the fulfilling of an exquisite law: there was worship. The
form it took, haply, was strange as well as riotous, yet in its
strangeness dreamed innocence and purity, and in its very riot flamed
that spirit which is divine.</p>

<p>For he found himself at length beside her once again; breathless and
panting, her sweet brown limbs aglow from the excitement of escape
denied; eyes shining like a blaze of stars, and pulses beating with
tumultuous life&mdash;helpless and yielding against the strength that pinned
her down between the roots. His eyes put mastery on her own. She looked
up into his face, obedient, happy, soft with love, surrendered with the
same delicious abandon that had swept her for a moment into other arms.
&ldquo;You caught me in the end,&rdquo; she sighed. &ldquo;I only played awhile.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I hold you for ever,&rdquo; he replied, half wondering at the rough power in
his voice.</p>

<p>It was here the hush of worship stole upon her little face, into her
obedient eyes, about her parted lips. She ceased her wilful struggling.</p>

<p>
&ldquo;Listen!&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;I hear a step upon the glades beyond. The
iris and the lily open; the earth is ready, waiting; we must be ready
too! <em>He</em> is coming!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He released her and sprang up; the entire company rose too. All stood,
all bowed the head. There was an instant&rsquo;s subtle panic, but it was
the panic of reverent awe that preludes a descent of deity. For a wind
passed through the branches with a sound that is the oldest in the
world and so the youngest. Above it there rose the shrill, faint piping
of a little reed. Only the first, true sounds were audible&mdash;wind and
water&mdash;the tinkling of the dewdrops as they fell, the murmur of the
trees against the air. This was the piping that they heard. And in the
hush the stars bent down to hear, the riot paused, the orgy passed and
died. The figures waited, kneeling then with one accord. They listened
with&mdash;the Earth.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He comes.&thinsp;... He comes ...&rdquo; the valley breathed about them.</p>

<p>There was a footfall from far away, treading across a world unruined
and unstained. It fell with the wind and water, sweetening the valley
into life as it approached. Across the rivers and forests it came
gently, tenderly, but swiftly and with a power that knew majesty.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He comes.&thinsp;... He comes&thinsp;...!&rdquo; rose with the murmur of the wind and water
from the host of lowered heads.</p>

<p>The footfall came nearer, treading a world grown soft with worship.
It reached the grove. It entered. There was a sense of intolerable
loveliness, of brimming life, of rapture. The thousand faces lifted
like a cloud. They heard the piping close. And so He came.</p>

<p>But He came with blessing. With the stupendous Presence there was joy,
the joy of abundant, natural life, pure as the sunlight and the wind.
He passed among them. There was great movement&mdash;as of a forest shaking,
as of deep water falling, as of a cornfield swaying to the wind, yet
gentle as of a harebell shedding its burden of dew that it has held
too long because of love. He passed among them, touching every head.
The great hand swept with tenderness each face, lingered a moment on
each beating heart. There was sweetness, peace, and loveliness; but
above all, there was&mdash;life. He sanctioned every natural joy in them and
blessed each passion with his power of creation.&thinsp;... Yet each one saw
him differently: some as a wife or maiden desired with fire, some as
a youth or stalwart husband, others as a figure veiled with stars or
cloaked in luminous mist, hardly attainable; others, again&mdash;the fewest
these, not more than two or three&mdash;as that mysterious wonder which
tempts the heart away from known familiar sweetness into a wilderness
of undecipherable magic without flesh and blood.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>To two, in particular, He came so near that they could feel his breath
of hills and fields upon their eyes. He touched them with both mighty
hands. He stroked the marble breasts, He felt the little hidden horns
... and, as they bent lower so that their lips met together for an
instant, He took her arms and twined them about the curved, brown neck
that she might hold him closer still.&thinsp;...</p>

<p>Again a footfall sounded far away upon an unruined world ... and He was
gone&mdash;back into the wind and water whence He came. The thousand faces
lifted; all stood up; the hush of worship still among them. There was a
quiet as of the dawn. The piping floated over woods and fields, fading
into silence. All looked at one another.&thinsp;... And then once more the
laughter and the play broke loose.</p>


<h3>4</h3>

<p>&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll go,&rdquo; she cried, &ldquo;and peep upon that other world where life hangs
like a prison on their eyes!&rdquo; And, in a moment, they were across the
soaking grass, the lawn and flower-beds, and close to the walls of the
heavy mansion. He peered in through a window, lifting her up to peer
in with him. He recognised the world to which outwardly he belonged; he
understood; a little gasp escaped him; and a slight shiver ran down the
girl&rsquo;s body into his own. She turned her eyes away. &ldquo;See,&rdquo; she murmured
in his ear, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s ugly, it&rsquo;s not natural. They feel guilty and ashamed.
There is no innocence!&rdquo; She saw the men; it was the women that he saw
chiefly.</p>

<p>Lolling ungracefully, with a kind of boldness that asserted
independence, the women smoked their cigarettes with an air of
invitation they sought to conceal and yet showed plainly. He saw
his familiar world in nakedness. Their backs were bare, for all the
elaborate clothes they wore; they hung their breasts uncleanly; in
their eyes shone light that had never known the open sun. Hoping they
were alluring and desirable, they feigned a guilty ignorance of that
hope. They all pretended. Instead of wind and dew upon their hair, he
saw flowers grown artificially to ape wild beauty, tresses without
lustre borrowed from the slums of city factories. He watched them
man&oelig;uvring with the men; heard dark sentences; caught gestures half
delivered whose meaning should just convey that glimpse of guilt they
deemed to increase pleasure. The women were calculating, but nowhere
glad; the men experienced, but nowhere joyous. Pretended innocence lay
cloaked with a veil of something that whispered secretly, clandestine,
ashamed, yet with a brazen air that laid mockery instead of sunshine in
their smiles. Vice masqueraded in the ugly shape of pleasure; beauty
was degraded into calculated tricks. They were not natural. They knew
not joy.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The forward ones, the civilised!&rdquo; she laughed in his ear, tweaking his
horns with energy. &ldquo;<em>We</em> are the backward!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Unclean,&rdquo; he muttered, recalling a catchword of the world he gazed
upon.</p>

<p>They were the civilised! They were refined and educated&mdash;advanced.
Generations of careful breeding, mate cautiously selecting mate,
laid the polish of caste upon their hands and faces where gleamed
ridiculous, untaught jewels&mdash;rings, bracelets, necklaces hanging
absurdly from every possible angle.</p>

<p>&ldquo;But&mdash;they are dressed up&mdash;for fun,&rdquo; he exclaimed, more to himself than
to the girl in skins who clung to his shoulders with her naked arms.</p>

<p>&ldquo;<em>Un</em>dressed!&rdquo; she answered, putting her brown hand in play across his
eyes. &ldquo;Only they have forgotten even that!&rdquo; And another shiver passed
through her into him. He turned and hid his face against the soft skins
that touched his cheek. He kissed her body. Seizing his horns, she
pressed him to her, laughing happily.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Look!&rdquo; she whispered, raising her head again; &ldquo;they&rsquo;re coming out.&rdquo;
And he saw that two of them, a man and a girl, with an interchange
of secret glances, had stolen from the room and were already by the
door of the conservatory that led into the garden. It was his wife to
be&mdash;and his distinguished cousin.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, Pan!&rdquo; she cried in mischief. The girl sprang from his arms and
pointed. &ldquo;We will follow them. We will put natural life into their
little veins!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Or panic terror,&rdquo; he answered, catching the yellow panther skin and
following her swiftly round the building. He kept in the shadow, though
she ran full into the blaze of moonlight. &ldquo;But they can&rsquo;t see us,&rdquo;
she called, looking over her shoulder a moment. &ldquo;They can only feel
our presence, perhaps.&rdquo; And, as she danced across the lawn, it seemed
a moonbeam slipped from a sapling birch tree that the wind curved
earthwards, then tossed back against the sky.</p>

<p>Keeping just ahead, they led the pair, by methods known instinctively
to elemental blood yet not translatable&mdash;led them towards the little
grove of waiting pines. The night wind murmured in the branches; a bird
woke into a sudden burst of song. These sounds were plainly audible.
But four little pointed ears caught other, wilder notes behind the wind
and music of the bird&mdash;the cries and ringing laughter, the leaping
footsteps and the happy singing of their merry kin within the wood.</p>

<p>And the throng paused then amid the revels to watch the &ldquo;civilised&rdquo;
draw near. They presently reached the trees, halted, looked about them,
hesitated a moment&mdash;then, with a hurried movement as of shame and fear
lest they be caught, entered the zone of shadow.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go in here,&rdquo; said the man, without music in his voice. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s dry
on the pine needles, and we can&rsquo;t be seen.&rdquo; He led the way; she picked
up her skirts and followed over the strip of long wet grass. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s a
log all ready for us,&rdquo; he added, sat down, and drew her into his arms
with a sigh of satisfaction. &ldquo;Sit on my knee; it&rsquo;s warmer for your
pretty figure.&rdquo; He chuckled; evidently they were on familiar terms,
for though she hesitated, pretending to be coy, there was no real
resistance in her, and she allowed the ungraceful roughness. &ldquo;But are
we <em>quite</em> safe? Are you sure?&rdquo; she asked between his kisses.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What does it matter, even if we&rsquo;re not?&rdquo; he replied, establishing her
more securely on his knees. &ldquo;But, as a matter of fact, we&rsquo;re safer here
than in my own house.&rdquo; He kissed her hungrily. &ldquo;By Jove, Hermione, but
you&rsquo;re divine,&rdquo; he cried passionately, &ldquo;divinely beautiful. I love you
with every atom of my being&mdash;with my soul.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, dear, I know&mdash;I mean, I know you do, but&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But what?&rdquo; he asked impatiently.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Those detectives&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>He laughed. Yet it seemed to annoy him. &ldquo;My wife is a beast, isn&rsquo;t
she?&mdash;to have me watched like that,&rdquo; he said quickly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;They&rsquo;re everywhere,&rdquo; she replied, a sudden hush in her tone. She
looked at the encircling trees a moment, then added bitterly: &ldquo;I hate
her, simply <em>hate</em> her.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I love you,&rdquo; he cried, crushing her to him, &ldquo;that&rsquo;s all that matters
now. Don&rsquo;t let&rsquo;s waste time talking about the rest.&rdquo; She contrived to
shudder, and hid her face against his coat, while he showered kisses on
her neck and hair.</p>

<p>And the solemn pine trees watched them, the silvery moonlight fell on
their faces, the scent of new-mown hay went floating past.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I love you with my very soul,&rdquo; he repeated with intense conviction.
&ldquo;I&rsquo;d do anything, give up anything, bear anything&mdash;just to give you a
moment&rsquo;s happiness. I swear it&mdash;before God!&rdquo;</p>

<p>There was a faint sound among the trees behind them, and the girl sat
up, alert. She would have scrambled to her feet, but that he held her
tight.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What the devil&rsquo;s the matter with you to-night?&rdquo; he asked in a
different tone, his vexation plainly audible. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re as nervy as if
<em>you</em> were being watched, instead of me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She paused before she answered, her finger on her lip. Then she said
slowly, hushing her voice a little:</p>

<p>&ldquo;Watched! That&rsquo;s exactly what I did feel. I&rsquo;ve felt it ever since we
came into the wood.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Nonsense, Hermione. It&rsquo;s too many cigarettes.&rdquo; He drew her back into
his arms, forcing her head up so that he could kiss her better.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I suppose it is nonsense,&rdquo; she said, smiling. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s gone now, anyhow.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He began admiring her hair, her dress, her shoes, her pretty ankles,
while she resisted in a way that proved her practice. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not <em>me</em>
you love,&rdquo; she pouted, yet drinking in his praise. She listened to his
repeated assurances that he loved her with his &ldquo;soul&rdquo; and was prepared
for any sacrifice.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I feel so safe with you,&rdquo; she murmured, knowing the moves in the game
as well as he did. She looked up guiltily into his face, and he looked
down with a passion that he thought perhaps was joy.</p>

<p>
&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll be married before the summer&rsquo;s out,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and all the
thrill and excitement will be over. Poor Hermione!&rdquo; She lay back in his
arms, drawing his face down with both hands, and kissing him on the
lips. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll have more of him than you can do with&mdash;eh? As much as you
care about, anyhow.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I shall be much more free,&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;Things will be easier. And
I&rsquo;ve got to marry some one&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>She broke off with another start. There was a sound again behind them.
The man heard nothing. The blood in his temples pulsed too loudly,
doubtless.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, what is it this time?&rdquo; he asked sharply.</p>

<p>She was peering into the wood, where the patches of dark shadow and
moonlit spaces made odd, irregular patterns in the air. A low branch
waved slightly in the wind.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Did you hear that?&rdquo; she asked nervously.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wind,&rdquo; he replied, annoyed that her change of mood disturbed his
pleasure.</p>

<p>&ldquo;But something moved&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Only a branch. We&rsquo;re quite alone, quite safe, I tell you,&rdquo; and
there was a rasping sound in his voice as he said it. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be so
imaginative. I can take care of you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She sprang up. The moonlight caught her figure, revealing its exquisite
young curves beneath the smother of the costly clothing. Her hair had
dropped a little in the struggle. The man eyed her eagerly, making a
quick, impatient gesture towards her, then stopped abruptly. He saw the
terror in her eyes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, hark! What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; she whispered in a startled voice. She put her
finger up. &ldquo;Oh, let&rsquo;s go back. I don&rsquo;t like this wood. I&rsquo;m frightened.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Rubbish,&rdquo; he said, and tried to catch her by the waist.</p>
<p></p>
<p>&ldquo;It&rsquo;s safer in the house&mdash;my room&mdash;or yours&mdash;&mdash;&rdquo; She broke off again.
&ldquo;There it is&mdash;don&rsquo;t you hear? It&rsquo;s a footstep!&rdquo; Her face was whiter
than the moon.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I tell you it&rsquo;s the wind in the branches,&rdquo; he repeated gruffly. &ldquo;Oh,
come on, <em>do</em>. We were just getting jolly together. There&rsquo;s nothing to
be afraid of. Can&rsquo;t you believe me?&rdquo; He tried to pull her down upon his
knee again with force. His face wore an unpleasant expression that was
half leer, half grin.</p>

<p>But the girl stood away from him. She continued to peer nervously about
her. She listened.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You give me the creeps,&rdquo; he exclaimed crossly, clawing at her waist
again with passionate eagerness that now betrayed exasperation. His
disappointment turned him coarse.</p>

<p>The girl made a quick movement of escape, turning so as to look in
every direction. She gave a little scream.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That <em>was</em> a step. Oh, oh, it&rsquo;s close beside us. I heard it. We&rsquo;re
being watched!&rdquo; she cried in terror. She darted towards him, then
shrank back. He did not try to touch her this time.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Moonshine!&rdquo; he growled. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve spoilt my&mdash;spoilt our chance with your
silly nerves.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But she did not hear him apparently. She stood there shivering as with
sudden cold.</p>

<p>&ldquo;There! I saw it again. I&rsquo;m sure of it. Something went past me through
the air.&rdquo;</p>

<p>And the man, still thinking only of his own pleasure frustrated, got
up heavily, something like anger in his eyes. &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; he said
testily; &ldquo;if you&rsquo;re going to make a fuss, we&rsquo;d better go. The house
<em>is</em> safer, possibly, as you say. You know my room. Come along!&rdquo; Even
that risk he would not take. He loved her with his &ldquo;soul.&rdquo;</p>

<p>They crept stealthily out of the wood, the girl slightly in front of
him, casting frightened backward glances. Afraid, guilty, ashamed, with
an air as though they had been detected, they stole back towards the
garden and the house, and disappeared from view.</p>

<p>And a wind rose suddenly with a rushing sound, poured through the wood
as though to cleanse it, swept out the artificial scent and trace of
shame, and brought back again the song, the laughter, and the happy
revels. It roared across the park, it shook the windows of the house,
then sank away as quickly as it came. The trees stood motionless again,
guarding their secret in the clean, sweet moonlight that held the world
in dream until the dawn stole up and sunshine took the earth with joy.</p>
</div>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
