<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To the Children</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="to-the-children" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Children</h2>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>O children, open your arms to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let your hair fall over my eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me sleep a moment and then awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in your garden of sweet surprise!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For the grown-up folk are a wearisome folk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they laugh all my fancies to scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grown-up folk are a wearisome folk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they laugh all my fancies to scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They laugh all my fancies to scorn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O children, open your hearts to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell me your wonder-thoughts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lives in the palace inside your brain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who plays in its outer courts?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who hides in the hours tomorrow holds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sleeps in your yesterdays?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who tip-toes along past the curtained folds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the shadow that twilight lays?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O children, open your eyes to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell me your visions too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who squeezes the sponge when the salt tears flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dim their magical blue?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who brushes the fringe of their lace-veined lids?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who trims their innocent light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who draws up the blinds when the sun peeps in?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fastens them down at night?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O children, I pray you speak low to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cover my eyes with your hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O kiss me again till I sleep and dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I'm lost in your Fairy-lands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I'm lost in your Fairy-lands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For the grown-up folk are a troublesome folk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the book of their childhood is torn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is blotted, and crumpled, and torn!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
